NE-1517: Set EIP for NLB Ingress controller. (#1593)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/ingress/set_eip_nlb_ingress.md

    type: Available

```

3. Are there any pre-requisites for this EP ?
  Yes, please refer section `Pre-requisites` under [Workflow Description](#workflow-description)

4. What happens when the cluster-admin specified invalid EIPs in install-config.yaml at installation time (day 0) ?

   We would try to get the installer feasibly validate the `install-config.yaml` for day 0.
   - For validation for BYOB subnets:
  We will count if the number of cluster subnets provided by the user in the `install-config.yaml` were equal to 
  the number of the eip allocations provided in the install-config.yaml. We will need to add validations 
  in [pkg/asset/installconfig/aws/validation.go](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/master/pkg/asset/installconfig/aws/validation.go#L186)

  - For validation for  Installer Created Subnets:
  The number of EIPs must match number of AZs in region.

  - Validation for Invalid EIP which is generally when the EIP does not exist in the AWS environment or is not available.
    For Example: is assigned to some instance or when count of EIPs does not match to the number of subnets.

5. What happens when a cluster-admin adds invalid EIPs ?

>   The load balancer creation would not proceed and fail as per details mentioned in [subsection of Test Plan](#test-when-ingress-controller-cr-has-been-provided-with-invalid-eipallocations-)

Reviewer: Looks like this link is broken. :)

  No. The eips in the cluster config are only used when the operator creates the default IngressController.
  If the default `IngressController` is not found and if the polling loop kicks in and detects it's absence it will
  create a default IC with the eips mentioned in the cluster config object of ingress.
  However, it isn't used as a default value when eipAllocations is not specified on the IngressController because
  the cluster-admin may delete the default IngressController and then recreate it with no eips or no already assigned eips
  or before the polling loop does.
  Because the operator only uses the cluster config to specify eipAllocations when the operator itself creates
  the default IngressController, the cluster-admin can always delete and recreate the default IngressController
  with eipAllocations deliberately left unspecified, so that the IngressController doesn't use the EIPs from the
  cluster config. Or the cluster-admin  can always delete and recreate the default IngressController with eipAllocations
  which are not already specified in the config ingress cluster object.

> 10. Can you assign `eipAllocations` to an `IngressController` with scope `Internal` ?
>     No, eipAllocations can be provided only for an `IngressController` with scope `External`.

Reviewer: nit, new line:
```suggestion
10. Can you assign `eipAllocations` to an `IngressController` with scope `Internal` ?

    No, eipAllocations can be provided only for an `IngressController` with scope `External`.
```

    The default IC is set to [External](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/blob/master/pkg/operator/operator.go#L476)
    However, we will validate the `IngressController` CR at API using CEL to check if `eipAllocations` are provided only when `scope` is 
    set to `External`.

## Test Plan

### This EP will be covered by unit tests in the following:
- cluster-ingress-operator
- installer

> ### This  EP will also be covered by end to end tests:

Reviewer: Are we planning to add an e2e to installer? It would be nice at least to exercise the managed VPC scenario.

The job [`e2e-aws-ovn-public-ipv4-pool`][job] and step [`ipi-conf-aws-byo-ipv4-pool-public`][step] were created to similar purpose, if you would like to explore it.

[job]: https://github.com/openshift/release/blob/master/ci-operator/config/openshift/installer/openshift-installer-release-4.16__altinfra.yaml#L155-L171
[step]: https://github.com/openshift/release/blob/master/ci-operator/step-registry/ipi/conf/aws/byo-ipv4-pool-public/ipi-conf-aws-byo-ipv4-pool-public-ref.yaml

- Any existing ingress controller should be able to be updated with restart to use EIPs. 

### Non-Goals

- Creation of EIPs in AWS.
- Keep a track of changes in the EIP in the AWS environment.
- Static IP usage with NLBs for API server.
- Check the number of public subnets available and then compare number of subnets
  with the number of EIPs the user provides.

## Proposal

EIP = AWS Elastic IP, NLB = AWS Network LoadBalancer 

In this enhancement we would be adding API fields in the installer and the Ingress Controller CR
to set the AWS EIP for the NLB Ingress Controller. The cluster ingress operator will then create 
the ingress controller and get the EIP assigned to the service LoadBalancer with the annotation 
`service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`
Note: `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` is a [kubernetes service annotation ](`service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`).

### Workflow Description

**cluster administrator** is a human user responsible for deploying a
cluster. A cluster administrator also has the rights to modify the cluster level components.

> 

Reviewer 2: Please note that in all of these workflows, a prerequisite is that the EIPs have been created in AWS, which is not something that OpenShift itself does.

Author: yes added a pre-requisite

  selector:
    ingresscontroller.operator.openshift.io/deployment-ingresscontroller: test
  sessionAffinity: None
  type: LoadBalancer
status:
  loadBalancer:
    ingress:
    - hostname: a95d070adbbf045c9b356ed9db8d3cda-89fbf4dfc638408e.elb.us-east-1.amazonaws.com
```

### API Extensions
- The API for setting `eipAllocations` field in the installer-config will look as follows in the file `pkg/types/aws/platform.go` of `openshift/installer` github repo:

```go
// Platform stores all the global configuration that all machinesets
// use.
type Platform struct {
...
    // https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonECS/latest/developerguide/load-balancer-types.html#nlb 
    // +optional 
    LBType configv1.AWSLBType `json:"lbType,omitempty"`

    // networkLoadBalancerParameters holds configuration parameters for an AWS
    // network load balancer. Present only if type is NLB.
    //
    // +optional
    NetworkLoadBalancerParameters *configv1.AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters `json:"nlbParameters,omitempty"`
}

```

- The installer will propagate the eipAllocations to the cluster ingress configuration which the ingress operator uses to create the default Ingress Controller

>   will look as follows in the file `config/v1/types_ingress.go` of `openshift/api` github repo:

Reviewer 2: This is a run-on sentence (although Google Doc's grammar checker misses it).  Also, please make sure to use consistent formatting, and link to the relevant source code:
```suggestion
- The installer will propagate `eipAllocations` from `install-config.yaml` to the cluster ingress configuration, which the ingress operator uses to create the default IngressController.  
The following  definitions will be added in the file [`config/v1/types_ingress.go`](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/master/config/v1/types_ingress.go) of the [`openshift/api`](https://github.com/openshift/api) GitHub repository:

- The E2E tests should be consistently passing and a PR will be created
  to enable the feature gate by default.

### Removing a deprecated feature

- N/A. We do not plan to deprecate this feature.

## Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

During upgrade, if there are any ingress controller load balancer services which have `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`
then the Ingress Controller would make the LoadBalancerProgressing Status to True and update the message to either manually delete
and create the service or set the values of the `eipAllocations` in the Ingress Controller to values in the service annotation.

Downgrading will not change the value of the annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`.

## Version Skew Strategy

N/A

## Operational Aspects of API Extensions

- If the Ingress Operator can't scale an Ingress Controller with incorrect `eipAllocations` then
  the Kubernetes LoadBalancer service will be in "Pending" as an LB won't be created in AWS and 
  thereby assigned to the LoadBalancer service.

- In case of event of an issue because of this API the network edge team needs to be involved
  in.

> ## Support Procedures

Reviewer 2: Reminder:  You should mention here that the cluster-admin is responsible for creating the EIPs.  As we discussed a couple times internally, there should be a note here that the AWS account has some cap on the number of EIPs, and this note should describe what it looks like when this cap is hit.

Author: yes added

---
title: set_eip_nlb_ingress
authors:
  - miheer
reviewers:
  - Miciah
  - frobware
  - gspence
  - candace
approvers:
  - Miciah
  - frobware
  - gspence
api-approvers:
  - joel
  - deads
creation-date: 2024-03-06

> last-updated: 2024-03-22

Reviewer 3: Please update on the next push.

Author: OK

tracking-link:
  - "https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-1274"
see-also:
  - ""
replaces:
  - ""
superseded-by:
  - ""
---

# Set AWS EIP For NLB Ingress Controller

## Summary

> This enhancement allows user to set AWS EIP for the NLB default or custom ingress controller.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This enhancement allows a user to configure AWS Elastic IP (EIP) for an AWS Network Load Balancer (NLB ) default or custom ingress controller.
```

Author: OK

This is a feature request to enhance the IngressController API to be able to support static IPs during
- Install time
- Custom NLB ingress controller creation 
- Reconfiguration of the custom and default router to NLB with EIP allocation.

## Motivation

### User Stories

- As a cluster administrator, I want to provision EIPs and use them with an NLB IngressController.
- As a cluster administrator, I want to ensure EIPs are used with NLB on default router at install time.
- As a cluster administrator, I want to reconfigure default router to use EIPs.
- As a cluster administrator of OpenShift on AWS (ROSA), I want to use static IPs (and therefore AWS Elastic IPs) so that 
  I can configure appropriate firewall rules.
  I want the default AWS Load Balancer that they use (NLB) for their router to use these EIPs.
- As a cluster administrator who has purchased a block of public IPv4 addresses, I want to use these IP addresses, so 

>   that I can avoid Amazon's new charge for public IP addresses.

Reviewer 4: Does EIP means always use External (Internet-facing) LB ? I'm wondering if Internal LB support EIPs

Reviewer: > always use External (Internet-facing) LB ?

Short answer yes - for this use case. From [docs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/elastic-ip-addresses-eip.html#using-instance-addressing-eips-allocating) state:

> An Elastic IP address is a public IPv4 address, which is reachable from the internet.

Private Network Load Balancers can assign private IP, but not through EIP. The [ELB docs][docs-lb] states:

> For internal load balancers, you can specify one private IP address per subnet from the IPv4 range of the subnet.

FWIW additionally, there is another use case using Outpost - not applied to this EP as it is out of the scope to support Outpost/ALB:
EIPs can assign IPs from a Customer Owned IP (CoIP) Pool when using Outposts, which can be a private IP from a customer, not from AWS boarder group. From [Customer-owned IP addresses][docs-op] docs, the example "Example: Internet connectivity through the on-premises networ" shares the use case of using an EIP allocated from CoIP with private IP:

> - The local gateway uses BGP advertisement to advertise the customer-owned IP address pool to the on-premises network.
 > - An Elastic IP address association that maps 10.0.3.112 to 10.1.0.2.

[docs-lb]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/elasticloadbalancing/latest/APIReference/API_CreateLoadBalancer.html
[docs-eip]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/elastic-ip-addresses-eip.html#using-instance-addressing-eips-allocating
[docs-op]: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/outposts/latest/userguide/routing.html#ip-addressing

### Goals
- Users are able to use EIP for a NLB Ingress Controller.
- Users are able to create a NLB default Ingress Controller during install time with the EIPs specified during install.

> - The ELB of an existing IngressController should be able to be reconfigured to use specific EIPs by updating the IngressController CR and recreating the ELB with Load Balancer Type as `NLB`.
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The AWS Elastic Load Balancer (ELB) of an existing IngressController can be reconfigured to use specific EIPs by updating the IngressController specification and recreating the load balancer as type NLB.

```

Author: ok

### Non-Goals

> - Creation of EIPs in AWS.

Reviewer: WRT the use case of `As a cluster administrator who has purchased a block of public IPv4 addresses, I want to use these IP addresses, so that I can avoid Amazon's new charge for public IP addresses.` :

The installer is designing to provide BYO IP support consuming Public IPv4 that the user brought to AWS by setting the Pool ID on [install-config.yaml `platform.aws.publicIpv4Pool`](https://github.com/openshift/installer/pull/7983/files#diff-7941d8da46384fc43b6eeae7d5c3319065b16940457822346c9ccb08cbcf47b4R109-R113), then, all resources created by the installer will consume Public IPs (EIP) from that pool.

To provide that automation, the terraform ([#7983](https://github.com/openshift/installer/pull/7983)) resources which claims EIP is setting that flag to consume from the pool when provided by the user. Furthermore, in the installer goal to migrate to CAPI (cluster-api), there is an implementation in progress to make the CAPA (cluster-api-provider-aws) to support the same capabilities performed on Terraform, which means, create the resources (NLB, Nat GW, instances) consuming from a custom pool, instead of delegating to the user to create the EIPs and associating it to the resources.
References on CAPA: [request](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-aws/issues/4887) , [Example API](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-aws/blob/dad9f3ce8627b38000efe70ed3b0857c9d89590a/api/v1beta2/awsmachine_types.go#L184-L190) 

Is there any chance the cluster ingress operator (or some controller) to consume an Public IPv4 Pool ID available on installer, calculate the subnets, and creates (manage lifecycle) of the Elastic IPs required to create a service load balancer to the default router? So the user, and CI, wont need extra steps prior installing a cluster.

cc @jupierce @patrickdillon @r4f4

Reviewer 3: @mtulio that looks outside the scope of this enhancement.

Author: >> Is there any chance the cluster ingress operator (or some controller) to consume an Public IPv4 Pool ID available on installer, calculate the subnets, and creates (manage lifecycle) of the Elastic IPs required to create a service load balancer to the default router? So the user, and CI, wont need extra steps prior installing a cluster.

No, this is not currently part of the epic. We may add it in the future if needed.

> - Keep a track of changes in the EIP in the AWS environment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Monitoring or management of changes to EIPs in the AWS environment.
```

Author: ok

> - Static IP usage with NLBs for API server.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Static IP usage with NLBs for OpenShift API server.
```

Author: OK

- Check the number of public subnets available and then compare number of subnets
  with the number of EIPs the user provides.

## Proposal

EIP = AWS Elastic IP, NLB = AWS Network LoadBalancer 

> In this enhancement we would be adding API fields in the installer and the Ingress Controller CR

Reviewer 3: Please use IngressController, all one word, throughout the doc, where it is capitalized.
```suggestion
This enhancement adds API fields in the installer and the IngressController specification
```

Author: ok

to set the AWS EIP for the NLB Ingress Controller. The cluster ingress operator will then create 
the ingress controller and get the EIP assigned to the service LoadBalancer with the annotation 
`service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`

> Note: `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` is a [kubernetes service annotation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/labels-annotations-taints/#service-beta-kubernetes-io-aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note: `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` is a standard [Kubernetes service annotation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/labels-annotations-taints/#service-beta-kubernetes-io-aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations).
```

Author: ok

> ### Workflow Description

Reviewer 3: Please move the section entitled "API" so that it can be read **before** the section entitled "Workflow Description".  The workflow doesn't make sense if you don't know anything about the API changes.

> Pre-requisites: One must [allocate Elastic IP address](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/elastic-ip-addresses-eip.html#using-instance-addressing-eips-allocating)

Reviewer 3: Why is this a prerequisite if we have a use case that references public IPv4 addresses not owned by AWS?

> As a cluster administrator who has purchased a block of public IPv4 addresses, I want to use these IP addresses, so that I can avoid Amazon's new charge for public IP addresses.

Author: I have updated it. We need either of them.

in their AWS environment which could be then used in the `eipAllocations` field of the IngressController CR.
Note: The AWS account has some cap on the number of EIPs per region. By default, all AWS accounts have a quota of five (5) Elastic IP addresses per Region, because public (IPv4) 

> internet addresses are a scarce public resource. For more details please check [Elastic IP address quota](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/elastic-ip-addresses-eip.html#using-instance-addressing-limit)

Author: ok

> internet addresses are a scarce public resource. For more details please check [Elastic IP address quota](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/elastic-ip-addresses-eip.html#using-instance-addressing-limit)

Author: done

When this cap is hit you will get the following error: `Elastic IP address could not be allocated.
The maximum number of addresses has been reached.`

**cluster administrator** is a human user responsible for deploying a
cluster. A cluster administrator also has the rights to modify the cluster level components.

#### Set EIP using an installer:

> 1. Cluster administrator creates `install-config.yaml` and adds the following in it. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Cluster administrator creates `install-config.yaml` and adds their domain, AWS region, and EIP allocation ids. 
```

Author: ok

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
baseDomain: example.com
metadata:
  name: test-cluster
platform:
  aws:

>     region: us-west-2

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    region: <AWS region>
```

Author: ok

>     lbType: NLB
>       networkLoadBalancer:
>         eipAllocations:
>         - eipalloc-1111
>         - eipalloc-2222
>         - eipalloc-3333
>         - eipalloc-4444
>         - eipalloc-5555 

Reviewer: What is the proposal A, or B?
- A) `platform.aws.networkLoadBalancer`
- B) `platform.aws.lbType.networkLoadBalancer`

edit: reading the EP it looks like A:

```suggestion
    lbType: NLB
    networkLoadBalancer:
      eipAllocations:
      - eipalloc-1111
      - eipalloc-2222
      - eipalloc-3333
      - eipalloc-4444
      - eipalloc-5555 
```

Author: @mtulio platform.aws.networkLoadBalancer I will fix the indentation.

Author: fixed

> pullSecret: '{"auths": ...}'
> sshKey: ssh-ed25519 AAAA...

Reviewer 3: Don't list pullSecret and sshKey here unless it is something new for EIP configuration.
```suggestion
...
```

Author: ok

```  
Here, the administrator needs to know how many public subnets the VPC ID of their cluster has.

> They may check it by clicking the `Load Balancers` tab then under the details click `VPC ID` under VPC, then click the link under `Main route table` and then check the column `Explicit subnet associations` which

Reviewer 3: If this is an AWS VPC ID, please state `AWS VPC ID`.  Also, add the AWS console to these instructions if that is where they click.  Otherwise people may try to look for it in the OpenShift console.

Author: Hi Grant! For all the load balancers the vpc id for the openshift cluster is the same which is tagged by the cluster name from my understanding. 

So, this line "They may check it on the `AWS Cloud Console` by clicking the `Load Balancers` tab then under the `details` click `VPC ID` under VPC, then click the link under `Main route table` and then check the column `Explicit subnet associations` which
will show you the number of public subnets available for that VPC ID."

has the correct flow. You don't need to select a specific load balancer.

Author: I will check on this again as it has been a while.

> They may check it by clicking the `Load Balancers` tab then under the details click `VPC ID` under VPC, then click the link under `Main route table` and then check the column `Explicit subnet associations` which

Author: actually it is VPC tagged  with cluster name

> They may check it by clicking the `Load Balancers` tab then under the details click `VPC ID` under VPC, then click the link under `Main route table` and then check the column `Explicit subnet associations` which

Author: >>The steps listed here are assuming you are bringing your own VPC, that's already created. I think that needs to be stated here.

OK I will state it.

>>  Shouldn't we also have a workflow for when the installer creates the VPC and public subnets? In that case, you'd need the cluster admin to find how many AZs are in the region they are installing into and express that the number of public subnets == the number of AZs in a region

I need to think on this. Lets have a call to discuss this. I did not get this `express that the number of public subnets == the number of AZs in a region`

> They may check it by clicking the `Load Balancers` tab then under the details click `VPC ID` under VPC, then click the link under `Main route table` and then check the column `Explicit subnet associations` which

Reviewer 5: Yes to be clear, I mean when the openshift-installer creates the VPC and subnets (the default functionality when `platform.aws.subnets` are NOT specified in install-config). SO this is NOT the BYO VPC use case.

For installer-created-VPCs, how does a cluster admin accurately predict how many EIPAllocations to bring so their cluster doesn't fail to install? Maybe they don't know what public subnets will be created by the openshift-installer. 

I think it would be good to have a workflow for this. To illustrate further, the workflow could start like:

1. Cluster admin wants to use EIPs, but isn't bringing their own VPC, so they need to know exactly how many EIPs to create.
2. Cluster admin should review https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/global-infrastructure/regions_az/ to find out how many AZs are in the region they are installing into.
3. Cluster admin should use the same number of EIPs as AZs in their region.

Let me know if that makes sense, or if anyone has a reason why this might be redundant. Cluster admins probably know how many AZs they are installing into, but I suppose a workflow like this would provide a concrete example of how this would happen if they don't.

> express that the number of public subnets == the number of AZs in a region

Sorry, I think this is a typo, I meant "express that the number of ~~public subnets~~ EIPs == the number of AZs in a region`

will show you the number of public subnets available for that VPC ID.

Other way to check VPC ID and subnet is go `Your VPCs` under `Virtual Public CLoud` section, then search for the cluster name using the
command `oc get infrastructure cluster -o jsonpath='{.status.infrastructureName}'`

> One can try these scripts present [here](https://github.com/frobware/haproxy-hacks/tree/master/NE-1398) as well.

Reviewer 3: This link is not exactly for public consumption.  Things could change/disappear.  Check with @frobware ?

Author: @frobware can we use this ?

Reviewer 3: Please drop it, as @frobware isn't reviewing this enhancement any more.

2. The installer will create the cluster ingress config object as follows:
```yaml

>  oc edit ingress.config/cluster -o yaml

Reviewer 3: Can you clean up the command (use `oc get`) and yaml so that only necessary items are shown?  e.g. remove creationTimestamp, generation, resourceVersion, uid.  Fix domain if it should match the previous example yaml.

Author: yes

 ...
 apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
 kind: Ingress
 metadata:
   creationTimestamp: "2022-08-30T01:03:17Z"
   generation: 11
   name: cluster
   resourceVersion: "60888"
   uid: de89cc95-449e-4ae5-a837-f4171fe61e36
 spec:
   domain: apps.testnlbapi.devcluster.openshift.com
   loadBalancer:
     platform:
       aws:
         type: NLB
           networkLoadBalancer:

>              eipAllocations:

Author: you are right. I changed it.

             - eipalloc-1111
             - eipalloc-2222
             - eipalloc-3333
             - eipalloc-4444
             - eipalloc-5555
       type: AWS
```

> 3. Ingress Operator will create the default ingress controller with the service type load balancer having the service annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` having values of the field `eipAllocations` 
>    from the Ingress Controller CR.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Ingress Operator will create the default ingress controller with the service type load balancer having the service annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` with values from the field `eipAllocations` 
   from the cluster ingress config object.
```

#### Create an Ingress Controller using Ingress Controller CR and assign the EIP allocation mentioned in the CR to the kubernetes Load Balancer service for the Ingress Controller.
1. Cluster administrator creates an Ingress Controller:
```yaml
 % cat custom-eip-cr.yaml
 apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
 kind: IngressController
 metadata:
   creationTimestamp: null
   name: test
   namespace: openshift-ingress-operator
 spec:
   domain: apps1.apps.misalunkeip16.devcluster.openshift.com
   endpointPublishingStrategy:
     loadBalancer:
       scope: External
       providerParameters:
         type: AWS
         aws:
           type: NLB

>            networkLoadBalancer:

Reviewer 4: Seems in PR https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/pull/1034/files the field `networkLoadBalancer` is changed to `nlbParameters` ?
Shall we update the same in install-config.yaml and ingress.config?

Author: Yes I will

             eipAllocations:
               - eipalloc-0956fea34de4cb7ab
               - eipalloc-0e9a3077a70de050a
               - eipalloc-0b69fc4691f54cdd0
               - eipalloc-01e6ba6cbba1a391b
               - eipalloc-0e242df173f906112

>      type: LoadBalancerService

Reviewer 3: Fix indentation?
```suggestion
       type: LoadBalancerService
```

Author: it is correct.

```
```sh
% oc create -f custom-eip-cr.yaml
ingresscontroller.operator.openshift.io/test created
```
```sh
% oc get ingresscontrollers/test -n openshift-ingress-operator
NAME   AGE
test   118s
```

Ingress Operator will create an NLB Ingress Controller called `test` with the service type load balancer having the service annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`
populated with the value from the eipAllocations field.

```yaml

> % oc get ingresscontroller test -n openshift-ingress-operator -o yaml

Author: Hi,

I have removed some parts from the IC and the service.

IC shows the status as well.

apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: IngressController
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: "2024-04-10T00:20:17Z"
  finalizers:
  - ingresscontroller.operator.openshift.io/finalizer-ingresscontroller
  generation: 2
  name: test
  namespace: openshift-ingress-operator
  resourceVersion: "58136"
  uid: 5f6da5d0-4ef1-429e-ba32-af35ad260c89
spec:
  clientTLS:
    clientCA:
      name: ""
    clientCertificatePolicy: ""
  domain: apps1.apps.misalunkeip16.devcluster.openshift.com
  endpointPublishingStrategy:
    loadBalancer:
      dnsManagementPolicy: Managed
      providerParameters:
        aws:
          networkLoadBalancer:
            eipAllocations:
            - eipalloc-0956fea34de4cb7ab
            - eipalloc-0e9a3077a70de050a
            - eipalloc-0b69fc4691f54cdd0
            - eipalloc-01e6ba6cbba1a391b
            - eipalloc-0e242df173f906112
          type: NLB
        type: AWS
      scope: External
    type: LoadBalancerService

>   httpCompression: {}

Reviewer 3: Everything between here and L303 can be replaced with `...` for clarity.

Author: I have updated the yaml.

    status: "True"
    type: DNSReady
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-10T00:20:50Z"
    status: "True"
    type: Available
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-10T00:20:50Z"
    status: "False"
    type: Progressing
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-10T00:20:50Z"
    status: "False"
    type: Degraded
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-10T00:20:17Z"
    message: IngressController is upgradeable.
    reason: Upgradeable
    status: "True"
    type: Upgradeable
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-10T00:20:17Z"
    message: No evaluation condition is detected.
    reason: NoEvaluationCondition
    status: "False"
    type: EvaluationConditionsDetected
  domain: apps1.apps.misalunkeip16.devcluster.openshift.com
  endpointPublishingStrategy:
    loadBalancer:
      dnsManagementPolicy: Managed
      providerParameters:
        aws:
          networkLoadBalancer:
            eipAllocations:
            - eipalloc-0956fea34de4cb7ab
            - eipalloc-0e9a3077a70de050a
            - eipalloc-0b69fc4691f54cdd0
            - eipalloc-01e6ba6cbba1a391b
            - eipalloc-0e242df173f906112
          type: NLB
        type: AWS
      scope: External
    type: LoadBalancerService

>   observedGeneration: 2
>   selector: ingresscontroller.operator.openshift.io/deployment-ingresscontroller=test
>   tlsProfile:
>     ciphers:
>     - ECDHE-ECDSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256
>     - ECDHE-RSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256
>     - ECDHE-ECDSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384
>     - ECDHE-RSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384
>     - ECDHE-ECDSA-CHACHA20-POLY1305
>     - ECDHE-RSA-CHACHA20-POLY1305
>     - DHE-RSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256
>     - DHE-RSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384
>     - TLS_AES_128_GCM_SHA256
>     - TLS_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
>     - TLS_CHACHA20_POLY1305_SHA256
>     minTLSVersion: VersionTLS12

Reviewer 3: Remove for clarity.
```suggestion
  ...
```

```

> 

Reviewer 3: The router-test service will now show the updated  `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` annotation values.

Author: ok

Author: added

```yaml
 % oc get svc router-test -n openshift-ingress -o yaml
 apiVersion: v1
 kind: Service
 metadata:
   annotations:

>      service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations: eipalloc-0956fea34de4cb7ab,eipalloc-0e9a3077a70de050a,eipalloc-0b69fc4691f54cdd0,eipalloc-01e6ba6cbba1a391b,eipalloc-0e242df173f906112

Reviewer 3: Everything after ` service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` should be removed for clarity.

Author: I have updated it. Please check.

>      service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations: eipalloc-0956fea34de4cb7ab,eipalloc-0e9a3077a70de050a,eipalloc-0b69fc4691f54cdd0,eipalloc-01e6ba6cbba1a391b,eipalloc-0e242df173f906112

Reviewer 6: @mtulio : I believe the AWS LB controller doc you linked is a little misleading or it wants you to follow the subnet annotation link to see that [the subnet discovery can be used too](https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.4/guide/service/annotations/#subnets). ALBC uses [the number of found subnets](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/aws-load-balancer-controller/blob/9e9432b654461a3bbc92638afcd8f4abc5de977f/pkg/service/model_build_load_balancer.go#L307-L309) which can come either from [the subnet annotation](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/aws-load-balancer-controller/blob/9e9432b654461a3bbc92638afcd8f4abc5de977f/pkg/service/model_build_load_balancer.go#L395-L400) or from [the subnet discovery](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/aws-load-balancer-controller/blob/9e9432b654461a3bbc92638afcd8f4abc5de977f/pkg/service/model_build_load_balancer.go#L425-L436).

However in the context of this EP we should check the aws cloud provider, which actually does the same thing as ALBC. It compares [the number of EIPs to the number of discovered subnets](https://github.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider-aws/blob/389877c071efb56481b4fc0265ea251081696092/pkg/providers/v1/aws_loadbalancer.go#L168-L170). The discovered subnets in turn can come [either from the annotation or from the discovery](https://github.com/kubernetes/cloud-provider-aws/blob/389877c071efb56481b4fc0265ea251081696092/pkg/providers/v1/aws.go#L1981-L1987).

> Is the [subnet](https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.4/guide/service/annotations/#subnets) annotation service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets required when using service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations or is it something implicit and only the len(aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations) must match the discovered subnets from the VPC?

So, either the annotation or the discovered. The latter may be more difficult to implement if we want to check this in the installer.

>      service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations: eipalloc-0956fea34de4cb7ab,eipalloc-0e9a3077a70de050a,eipalloc-0b69fc4691f54cdd0,eipalloc-01e6ba6cbba1a391b,eipalloc-0e242df173f906112

Author: @mtulio @alebedev87 Please check question number 4 under Open Questions section which mentions how to validate number of eips provided in the install-config.yaml

>      service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations: eipalloc-0956fea34de4cb7ab,eipalloc-0e9a3077a70de050a,eipalloc-0b69fc4691f54cdd0,eipalloc-01e6ba6cbba1a391b,eipalloc-0e242df173f906112

Reviewer 6: @miheer : The approach for BYO subnets where we will check `if len(user_provided_subnets) == len(user_provided_eips)` looks fine to me. However the approach for the installer created subnets you take only AZes into account, why not subnets instead?
> For validation for Installer Created Subnets: The number of EIPs must match number of AZs in region. Installer team has confirmed with this [approach](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1593/files#r1612258317).

Btw, I suppose Elastic IP allocations cannot be added to an internal NLB. Do we plan to cover this in the installer validations too?

>      service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations: eipalloc-0956fea34de4cb7ab,eipalloc-0e9a3077a70de050a,eipalloc-0b69fc4691f54cdd0,eipalloc-01e6ba6cbba1a391b,eipalloc-0e242df173f906112

Author: Elastic IP allocations can be added only for Internet facing LB.

>      service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations: eipalloc-0956fea34de4cb7ab,eipalloc-0e9a3077a70de050a,eipalloc-0b69fc4691f54cdd0,eipalloc-01e6ba6cbba1a391b,eipalloc-0e242df173f906112

Author: >  The approach for BYO subnets where we will check if len(user_provided_subnets) == len(user_provided_eips) looks fine to me. However the approach for the installer created subnets you take only AZes into account, why not subnets instead?

But, we are talking about validations for install-config.yaml which will happen before installer creates subnets.

>      service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations: eipalloc-0956fea34de4cb7ab,eipalloc-0e9a3077a70de050a,eipalloc-0b69fc4691f54cdd0,eipalloc-01e6ba6cbba1a391b,eipalloc-0e242df173f906112

Author: @alebedev87 i just tested without having the service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-scheme set to internet-facing and it still works.

> misalunk@misalunk-mac cluster-ingress-operator % oc get svc router-default -o yaml -n openshift-ingress                                                                       
> apiVersion: v1
> kind: Service
> metadata:
>   annotations:
>     service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations: eipalloc-01dc759ed2a00c006,eipalloc-0b34b49e5cb50de78,eipalloc-0bb8b0b96fbd97193,eipalloc-037bdabb0b743ee5e,eipalloc-06549fa0ea54275ec
>     service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-healthy-threshold: "2"
>     service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-interval: "10"
>     service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-timeout: "4"
>     service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-unhealthy-threshold: "2"
>     service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-type: nlb
>     traffic-policy.network.alpha.openshift.io/local-with-fallback: ""
>   creationTimestamp: "2024-06-16T07:06:51Z"
>   finalizers:
>   - service.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-cleanup

> misalunk@misalunk-mac cluster-ingress-operator % curl -vk https://console-openshift-console.apps.misalunktesteip70.devcluster.openshift.com 
> *   Trying 52.44.11.186:443...
> * connect to 52.44.11.186 port 443 failed: Operation timed out
> *   Trying 18.233.126.103:443...
> * Connected to console-openshift-console.apps.misalunktesteip70.devcluster.openshift.com (18.233.126.103) port 443
> * ALPN: curl offers h2,http/1.1
> * (304) (OUT), TLS handshake, Client hello (1):
> * (304) (IN), TLS handshake, Server hello (2):
> * (304) (IN), TLS handshake, Unknown (8):
> * (304) (IN), TLS handshake, Certificate (11):
> * (304) (IN), TLS handshake, CERT verify (15):
> * (304) (IN), TLS handshake, Finished (20):
> * (304) (OUT), TLS handshake, Finished (20):
> * SSL connection using TLSv1.3 / AEAD-AES128-GCM-SHA256
> * ALPN: server did not agree on a protocol. Uses default.
> * Server certificate:
> *  subject: CN=*.apps.misalunktesteip70.devcluster.openshift.com
> *  start date: Jun 16 02:11:05 2024 GMT
> *  expire date: Jun 16 02:11:06 2026 GMT
> *  issuer: CN=ingress-operator@1718503865
> *  SSL certificate verify result: self signed certificate in certificate chain (19), continuing anyway.
> * using HTTP/1.x
> > GET / HTTP/1.1
> > Host: console-openshift-console.apps.misalunktesteip70.devcluster.openshift.com
> > User-Agent: curl/8.4.0
> > Accept: */*
> > 
> < HTTP/1.1 200 OK

   uid: 812fb12c-8932-44bc-87fd-c257b7c0a455
 spec:
   allocateLoadBalancerNodePorts: true
   clusterIP: 172.30.242.110
   clusterIPs:
     - 172.30.242.110
   externalTrafficPolicy: Local
   healthCheckNodePort: 31251
   internalTrafficPolicy: Cluster
   ipFamilies:
     - IPv4
   ipFamilyPolicy: SingleStack
   ports:
     - name: http
       nodePort: 30920
       port: 80
       protocol: TCP
       targetPort: http
     - name: https
       nodePort: 30575
       port: 443
       protocol: TCP
       targetPort: https
   selector:
     ingresscontroller.operator.openshift.io/deployment-ingresscontroller: test
   sessionAffinity: None
   type: LoadBalancer
 status:
   loadBalancer:
     ingress:
       - hostname: a812fb12c893244bc87fdc257b7c0a45-e77e94821922b90d.elb.us-east-1.amazonaws.com
```

```sh
 % oc get pods -n openshift-ingress
NAME                             READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
router-default-7b4f96d59-qfj7z   1/1     Running   0          112m
router-default-7b4f96d59-tthts   1/1     Running   0          112m
router-test-5bbb685585-2g5f7     1/1     Running   0          7m38s
router-test-5bbb685585-np9w4     1/1     Running   0          7m38s

> ```

Reviewer 3: This part is not needed and clutters the instructions.

Author: OK removed

#### Cluster administrator updates eipAllocations field of the existing ingress controller

AWS platform requires deleting and recreating a load balancer to change its EIPs. 
This operation is disruptive: It interrupts ingress traffic and may cause the load balancer's address
to change. On these platforms, the operator signals that the user must delete the Kubernetes Service of type `LoadBalancer` object.

> Once the user performs this step, the operator recreates the load balancer with the desired scope to complete the operation.

Author: ok

In order to signal that the user must take action, the operator sets the Progressing status condition to True with a message that

> indicates the action that the user must take:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
provides instructions for how to effectuate the change:
```

> ```yaml

Reviewer 3: I would replace all of this with just the message: 

'One or more managed resources are progressing: The IngressController
      scope was changed from "eipalloc-0956fea34de4cb7ab,eipalloc-0e9a3077a70de050a,eipalloc-0b69fc4691f54cdd0,eipalloc-01e6ba6cbba1a391b,eipalloc-0e242df173f906112"
      to "eipalloc-0387f99f5d4724c3e,eipalloc-0b09650c180c2abb6,eipalloc-0161deab2f05fe2fe,eipalloc-0ec5738e0e3808b8a,eipalloc-09d56b78479ac651d".  To
      effectuate this change, you must delete the service: `oc -n openshift-ingress
      delete svc/router-test`; the service load-balancer will then be deprovisioned
      and a new one created.  This will most likely cause the new load-balancer to
      have a different host name and IP address from the old one''s.  Alternatively,
      you can revert the change to the IngressController: `oc -n openshift-ingress-operator
      patch ingresscontrollers/test --type=merge --patch=''{"spec":{"endpointPublishingStrategy":{"loadBalancer":{"providerParameters":{"type":"AWS","aws":{"type":"NLB","eipAllocations":["eipalloc-0956fea34de4cb7ab","eipalloc-0e9a3077a70de050a","eipalloc-0b69fc4691f54cdd0","eipalloc-01e6ba6cbba1a391b","eipalloc-0e242df173f906112"]}}}}}}'''

Author: I have kept some pieces which show status and eipAllocations

       type: Progressing
     - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-10T00:20:50Z"
       status: "False"
       type: Degraded
     - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-10T00:20:17Z"
       message: IngressController is upgradeable.
       reason: Upgradeable
       status: "True"
       type: Upgradeable
     - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-10T00:20:17Z"
       message: No evaluation condition is detected.
       reason: NoEvaluationCondition
       status: "False"
       type: EvaluationConditionsDetected
   domain: apps1.apps.misalunkeip16.devcluster.openshift.com
   endpointPublishingStrategy:
     loadBalancer:
       dnsManagementPolicy: Managed
       providerParameters:
         aws:
           networkLoadBalancer:
             eipAllocations:
               - eipalloc-0956fea34de4cb7ab
               - eipalloc-0e9a3077a70de050a
               - eipalloc-0b69fc4691f54cdd0
               - eipalloc-01e6ba6cbba1a391b
               - eipalloc-0e242df173f906112
           type: NLB
         type: AWS
       scope: External
     type: LoadBalancerService
   observedGeneration: 3
   selector: ingresscontroller.operator.openshift.io/deployment-ingresscontroller=test
   tlsProfile:

>      ciphers:

Author: regarding point 2 done

       - ECDHE-ECDSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256
       - ECDHE-RSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256
       - ECDHE-ECDSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384
       - ECDHE-RSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384
       - ECDHE-ECDSA-CHACHA20-POLY1305
       - ECDHE-RSA-CHACHA20-POLY1305
       - DHE-RSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256
       - DHE-RSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384
       - TLS_AES_128_GCM_SHA256
       - TLS_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
       - TLS_CHACHA20_POLY1305_SHA256
     minTLSVersion: VersionTLS12

```

> #### Cluster admin wants operator to update the Load Balancer service for updated Ingress Controller eipAllocations 

Author: ok

> Administrator can tell the Ingress Operator to complete the updating of Load Balancer service automatically

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The administrator can tell the Ingress Operator to complete the disruptive update of the service automatically
```

> by annotating the IngressController with the annotation called `ingress.operator.openshift.io/auto-delete-load-balancer=` 

Reviewer 3: Does this annotation really have `=` at the end?

Author: yes

Author: but to provide a blank value we have to put = and nothing on the right side of it

and then changing the eipAllocations by using the following commands:

Annotate ingress controller with `ingress.operator.openshift.io/auto-delete-load-balancer=`
```sh
oc -n openshift-ingress-operator annotate ingresscontrollers/test ingress.operator.openshift.io/auto-delete-load-balancer=
```

> Update the Ingress Controller with the following command:
> 
> ```sh
> % oc -n openshift-ingress-operator patch ingresscontrollers/default --type=merge --patch='{"spec":{"endpointPublishingStrategy":{"type":"LoadBalancerService","loadBalancer":{"providerParameters":{"type":"AWS","aws":{"type":"NLB","nlbParameters":{"eipAllocations":[]}}}}}}}'
> ```

Reviewer 3: We don't need to tell the user to patch if they are already making the update, right?
```suggestion
Update the Ingress Controller with the changes to the EIPs.

```

Author: patch command is one way to update the IC which needs to be done after setting the auto-delete-loadbalancer annotation if one wants the IC to recreate the service with eipAllocations

Author: so basically to update one can use oc edit or oc patch

> The above command will delete and create the Load Balancer service `router-test`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After the changes are saved, the operator will delete and create the load balancer service automatically.
```

Author: ok

```sh
% oc get svc router-test -n openshift-ingress 
NAME          TYPE           CLUSTER-IP       EXTERNAL-IP                                                                     PORT(S)                      AGE
router-test   LoadBalancer   172.30.230.109   a95d070adbbf045c9b356ed9db8d3cda-89fbf4dfc638408e.elb.us-east-1.amazonaws.com   80:30453/TCP,443:32704/TCP   77s
```

> The annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations:` is removed from the service as we updated the `eipAllocations` to an empty value.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you remove all EIPs, the annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations:` is removed from the service as well.
```

Author: ok

> The annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations:` is removed from the service as we updated the `eipAllocations` to an empty value.

Author: done

> The service object will look as follows:

Reviewer 3: Don't show the service object.

Author: ok

  finalizers:
  - service.kubernetes.io/load-balancer-cleanup
  labels:
    app: router
    ingresscontroller.operator.openshift.io/owning-ingresscontroller: test
    router: router-test
  name: router-test
  namespace: openshift-ingress
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: apps/v1
    controller: true
    kind: Deployment
    name: router-test
    uid: 466ac236-050b-4583-b2d1-99323f31fcba
  resourceVersion: "90321"
  uid: 95d070ad-bbf0-45c9-b356-ed9db8d3cdae
spec:
  allocateLoadBalancerNodePorts: true
  clusterIP: 172.30.230.109
  clusterIPs:
  - 172.30.230.109
  externalTrafficPolicy: Local
  healthCheckNodePort: 32652
  internalTrafficPolicy: Cluster
  ipFamilies:
  - IPv4
  ipFamilyPolicy: SingleStack
  ports:
  - name: http
    nodePort: 30453
    port: 80
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: http
  - name: https
    nodePort: 32704
    port: 443
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: https
  selector:
    ingresscontroller.operator.openshift.io/deployment-ingresscontroller: test
  sessionAffinity: None
  type: LoadBalancer
status:
  loadBalancer:
    ingress:
    - hostname: a95d070adbbf045c9b356ed9db8d3cda-89fbf4dfc638408e.elb.us-east-1.amazonaws.com
```

> 

Author: OK added

### API Extensions

> - The API for setting `eipAllocations` field in the installer-config will look as follows in the [file](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/master/pkg/types/aws/platform.go):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The first API extension for setting `eipAllocations` is in the installer [Platform](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/master/pkg/types/aws/platform.go) type, where the new field `NetworkLoadBalancerParameters` is added as an optional field.

```

Author: ok

```go
// Platform stores all the global configuration that all machinesets
// use.
type Platform struct {
...

>     // https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonECS/latest/developerguide/load-balancer-types.html#nlb 
>     // +optional 
>     LBType configv1.AWSLBType `json:"lbType,omitempty"`
> 

Reviewer 3: Not needed, remove for clarity.
```suggestion
```

Author: ok

    // The number of Allocation IDs must match the number of subnets that are used for the load balancer.
    // service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations: eipalloc-xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx,eipalloc-yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy
    // https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/elastic-ip-addresses-eip.html
    // https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.7/guide/service/annotations/#eip-allocations
    // +openshift:enable:FeatureGate=SetEIPForNLBIngressController
    EIPAllocations []configv1.EIPAllocations `json:"eipAllocations"`
}

```

### Topology Considerations

#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes

Currently, there is no unique consideration for making this change work with Hypershift.

#### Standalone Clusters

This proposal does not have any special implications for standalone clusters.

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift

This proposal does not have any special implications for single-node
deployments or MicroShift.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

#### 1. Set EIP through installer for the default ingress controller:
   

>    a. The admin sets the `eipAllocations` in the installer using the install-config.yaml.

Author: Yeah i tried many ways but it turns into a code block. Removing spaces causes all points to come in one line.

   
   b. The installer then sets the ingress cluster object with the `eipAllocations`.
   
   c. The cluster ingress operator then creates a default ingress controller by:

     i.   creating an default ingress controller CR
     
     ii.  then scaling a deployment for the Ingress Controller CR which has the value of the `eipAllocations` from the
          ingress cluster object.
     
     iii. then creating a service of service type load balancer with the annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`,
          which uses the value from the field `eipAllocations` of ingress controller CR.

> #### 2. Set EIP through the Ingress Controller CR:

Reviewer 3: This is the proper use case for this text:
```suggestion
#### 2. Create a new ingress controller with EIPs:
```

Author: ok

   
   The admin sets the `eipAllocations` in the Ingress Controller CR. Then same process
   as per point 1.c.ii and 1.c.iii is followed by the ingress operator. 

> #### 3. Update the existing EIP for the IngressController:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### 3. Update the EIP for an existing IngressController:
```

>    When the admin changes the eipAllocations field in the Ingress Controller CR, the ingress operator sets the Load Balancer

Author: Yes I have

   Progressing status as per [section](#Cluster administrator updates eipAllocations field of the existing ingress controller)

>    Then step 1.c.iii is followed by the ingress operator.

Reviewer 3: Isn't this the case where the admin has to delete the service in order to effectuate the change?

Author: thanks

Author: I have added a line for deletion.

   If the admin wants to detect the change in the eipAllocations and update the LB service automatically.
   rather than deleting the Service explicitly, it is possible to annotate the IngressController with

>    the newly defined ingress.operator.openshift.io/auto-delete-load-balancer annotation. 

Author: changed the text.

>    If the admin wants to detect the change in the eipAllocations and update the LB service automatically.
>    rather than deleting the Service explicitly, it is possible to annotate the IngressController with
>    the newly defined ingress.operator.openshift.io/auto-delete-load-balancer annotation. 
>    If the operator observes that this annotation is set and that its 
>    `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.networkLoadBalancer.eipAllocations` field has been changed, 
>    the operator automatically deletes the Service if needed to complete an eip change operation. 
>    This purpose of this annotation is to simplify automation: A tool can set the annotation when it 
>    creates the IngressController or when it updates `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.networkLoadBalancer.eipAllocations` 
>    to instruct the operator to perform the operation automatically. This annotation is not intended for
>    end-users to use directly.

Reviewer 3: You've already explained this earlier, I don't think it need to be lengthily explained again here.

```suggestion
   If the admin wants to detect the change in `eipAllocations` and update the LB service automatically, 
   rather than explicitly deleting the Service after changes, they can add the  ingress.operator.openshift.io/auto-delete-load-balancer annotation. 
```

Author: OK

   
### Risks and Mitigations

- Providing a right number of EIPs same as the number of public subnets as per AWS guidelines is an admin
responsibility.
- Also providing existing available EIPs which are not assigned to any instance is important.

> - If the above two points are not followed, the kubernetes LoadBalancer service for the Ingress Controller
> won't get assigned EIPs which will cause the LoadBalancer service to be in pending state by the 
> (CCM)Cloud Controller Manager. The reason for the error could be seen in the Status of the Ingress Controller.
> As of now we are not able to identify any more risks which can affect other components of the EP.

Reviewer 3: I think these errors should put it into a Degraded state, not a Pending state.

```suggestion
- If the above two points are not followed, the Kubernetes LoadBalancer service for the IngressController
won't get assigned EIPs,  which will cause the LoadBalancer service to be in persistently pending state by the 
Cloud Controller Manager (CCM). The reason for the persistently pending state is posted to the status of the IngressController.

As of now we are not able to identify any more risks which can affect other components of the EP.
```

### Drawbacks

> Currently, there are not any drawbacks as such for this EP.

Reviewer 5: I think we could add some draw backs:

 ```suggestion
Requiring the cluster admin to delete the LoadBalancer-type
service leads to several minutes of ingress traffic disruption.

This enhancement brings additional engineering complexity for upgrade
scenarios because cluster admins have previously been allowed to directly
add this annotation on a service. 

Debugging invalid EIP Allocations will be confusing for cluster admins and may
lead to extra support cases or bugs.

This design requires a cluster admin to check the IngressController's status after
updating `eipAllocations` for instructions on how to proceed.
```

Author: ok

## Open Questions

1. Shall we support updating EIP in the default Classic Ingress Controller after installation ?

Yes, we will support updating the EIP in the default Classic Ingress Controller.

> Procedure:

Author: Yes, but this is updating default IC. So, it shows the steps accordingly.

> Procedure:

Author: i have updated this

> Procedure:

Reviewer 5: Ah sorry I missed that detail.

I'll leave it up to you, but you could still add this a workflow, `Cluster administrator updates eipAllocations field of the default ingress controller using a Classic ELB` and link to that in this question here. I think you are describing a workflow here, and it feels more appropriate to have it organized as a workflow.

> Procedure:

Author: done

```sh
oc edit ingresscontroller default -o yaml
```

> The yaml of the default ingresscontroller should look like this:

Reviewer 3: We don't need to see what it looks like prior to the edit.  Please remove this for clarity.

    reason: NoEvaluationCondition
    status: "False"
    type: EvaluationConditionsDetected
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-09T22:43:21Z"
    message: Canary route checks for the default ingress controller are successful
    reason: CanaryChecksSucceeding
    status: "True"
    type: CanaryChecksSucceeding
  domain: apps.misalunkeip16.devcluster.openshift.com
  endpointPublishingStrategy:
    loadBalancer:
      dnsManagementPolicy: Managed
      providerParameters:
        aws:
          classicLoadBalancer:
            connectionIdleTimeout: 0s
          type: Classic
        type: AWS
      scope: External
    type: LoadBalancerService
  observedGeneration: 1
  selector: ingresscontroller.operator.openshift.io/deployment-ingresscontroller=default
  tlsProfile:
    ciphers:
    - ECDHE-ECDSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256
    - ECDHE-RSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256
    - ECDHE-ECDSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384
    - ECDHE-RSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384
    - ECDHE-ECDSA-CHACHA20-POLY1305
    - ECDHE-RSA-CHACHA20-POLY1305
    - DHE-RSA-AES128-GCM-SHA256
    - DHE-RSA-AES256-GCM-SHA384
    - TLS_AES_128_GCM_SHA256
    - TLS_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
    - TLS_CHACHA20_POLY1305_SHA256
    minTLSVersion: VersionTLS12
```

> Add the `ingress.operator.openshift.io/auto-delete-load-balancer:` to the ingress controller.

Author: ok

> Add the `ingress.operator.openshift.io/auto-delete-load-balancer:` to the ingress controller.

Author: done

```sh
% oc -n openshift-ingress-operator annotate ingresscontrollers/default ingress.operator.openshift.io/auto-delete-load-balancer=
ingresscontroller.operator.openshift.io/default annotated

> ```

Reviewer 3: Can't they add this annotation at the same time that they add the EIP allocations?

Author: They can using oc edit but I am showing it through oc commands.

            eipAllocations:
              - eipalloc-0956fea34de4cb7ab
              - eipalloc-0e9a3077a70de050a
              - eipalloc-0b69fc4691f54cdd0
              - eipalloc-01e6ba6cbba1a391b
              - eipalloc-0e242df173f906112
          type: NLB
        type: AWS
      scope: External
    type: LoadBalancerService
```

Check if the router-default service was created with proper annotations.

```yaml
% oc get svc router-default -n openshift-ingress -o yaml         
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  annotations:
    service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations: eipalloc-0956fea34de4cb7ab,eipalloc-0e9a3077a70de050a,eipalloc-0b69fc4691f54cdd0,eipalloc-01e6ba6cbba1a391b,eipalloc-0e242df173f906112
    service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-healthy-threshold: "2"
    service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-interval: "10"
    service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-timeout: "4"
    service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-healthcheck-unhealthy-threshold: "2"
    service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-type: nlb
    traffic-policy.network.alpha.openshift.io/local-with-fallback: ""

>   creationTimestamp: "2024-04-10T08:04:41Z"

Reviewer 3: We don't need to see anything after the annotations in the Service yaml.

Author: I just updated it.

  name: router-default
  namespace: openshift-ingress
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: apps/v1
    controller: true
    kind: Deployment
    name: router-default
    uid: 6d547566-82f0-4a35-96bf-afd18c1fdc3e
  resourceVersion: "197756"
  uid: 84915856-2015-4d59-92dc-decc06c5779e
spec:
  allocateLoadBalancerNodePorts: true
  clusterIP: 172.30.128.122
  clusterIPs:
  - 172.30.128.122
  externalTrafficPolicy: Local
  healthCheckNodePort: 32623
  internalTrafficPolicy: Cluster
  ipFamilies:
  - IPv4
  ipFamilyPolicy: SingleStack
  ports:
  - name: http
    nodePort: 31065
    port: 80
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: http
  - name: https
    nodePort: 31778
    port: 443
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: https
  selector:
    ingresscontroller.operator.openshift.io/deployment-ingresscontroller: default
  sessionAffinity: None
  type: LoadBalancer
status:
  loadBalancer:
    ingress:
    - hostname: a8491585620154d5992dcdecc06c5779-7938285b62f7bebe.elb.us-east-1.amazonaws.com
```

2. What happens to the subnets added in the installer config?

Addition of subnets is a different EP. However, the eips should match the number of public subnets which is a user responsibility.

> More details on how to check the number of subnets are mentioned [here](#Set EIP using an installer)

Reviewer 3: This is not needed.

Author: ok

3. What happens when someone updates the eipAllocations for the load balancer service of an Ingress Controller ?

It is not supported to manually edit the eipAllocations for the load balancer service of an Ingress Controller.
However, if someone does that then they will find the error in status as follows in the IngressController:
```yaml
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-17T03:09:32Z"
    message: |-

>       The service-controller component is reporting SyncLoadBalancerFailed events like: Error syncing load balancer: failed to ensure load balancer: error creating load balancer: "ResourceInUse: The allocation IDs are not available for use\n\tstatus code: 400, request id: 58136c42-e1bd-4c1a-ac38-7078da2b1d95"

Reviewer 3: Add some line breaks so this shows without scrolling.
```suggestion
      The service-controller component is reporting SyncLoadBalancerFailed events like: Error syncing load 
      balancer: failed to ensure load balancer: error creating load balancer: "ResourceInUse: The allocation IDs 
      are not available for use\n\tstatus code: 400, request id: 58136c42-e1bd-4c1a-ac38-7078da2b1d95"
```

      The kube-controller-manager logs may contain more details.
    reason: SyncLoadBalancerFailed
    status: "False"
    type: LoadBalancerReady
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-17T02:54:25Z"
    message: LoadBalancer is not progressing
    reason: LoadBalancerNotProgressing
    status: "False"
    type: LoadBalancerProgressing
...
...
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-17T03:09:32Z"
    message: |-

>       One or more status conditions indicate unavailable: LoadBalancerReady=False (SyncLoadBalancerFailed: The service-controller component is reporting SyncLoadBalancerFailed events like: Error syncing load balancer: failed to ensure load balancer: error creating load balancer: "ResourceInUse: The allocation IDs are not available for use\n\tstatus code: 400, request id: 58136c42-e1bd-4c1a-ac38-7078da2b1d95"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      One or more status conditions indicate unavailable: LoadBalancerReady=False (SyncLoadBalancerFailed: 
      The service-controller component is reporting SyncLoadBalancerFailed events like: Error syncing load
      balancer: failed to ensure load balancer: error creating load balancer: "ResourceInUse: The allocation IDs 
      are not available for use\n\tstatus code: 400, request id: 58136c42-e1bd-4c1a-ac38-7078da2b1d95"
```

      The kube-controller-manager logs may contain more details.)
    reason: IngressControllerUnavailable
    status: "False"
    type: Available

```

> - Are there any pre-requisites for this EP ?

Reviewer 3: These are numbered questions above, please continue the numbering here and below.  But also, these are not Open Questions if they have answers.

Author: changed

  Yes, one must [allocate Elastic IP address](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/elastic-ip-addresses-eip.html#using-instance-addressing-eips-allocating)
  in their AWS environment which could be then used in the `eipAllocations` field of the IngressController CR.

- What happens when the cluster-admin specified invalid EIPs in install-config.yaml at installation time (day 0) ?
  We would try to get the installer feasibly validate the install config for day 0. However, we still need verify this

>   with the installer team. Mostly, we will need to add validations in [pkg/types/aws/validation/platform.go](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/master/pkg/types/aws/validation/platform.go)

Author: >>. For Installer Created Subnets, it's should be quite easy - number of EIPs must match number of AZs in region (installer team please confirm this).

I already check the number of public subnets in the e2e tests for the VPC ID which is tagged with the cluster name.

>   with the installer team. Mostly, we will need to add validations in [pkg/types/aws/validation/platform.go](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/master/pkg/types/aws/validation/platform.go)

Author: @gcs278, @mtulio, @patrickdillon PTAL a look at the Open Questions number 4 for this. Your help is needed.

Note: The following questions are applicable when `auto-delete-load-balancer` annotation is set in the IngressController as it tries to recreate the update Load Balancer.

> If not set then the LoadBalancerProgressing Status will be set to "True" with an message as described in [subsection of Test Plan](#update-an-ingress-controller-eipallocations-by-adding-auto-delete-load-balancer-annotation-in-the-ingress-controller-cr-which-already-has-eipallocations-set)

Reviewer 5: Which following questions is this talking about? You mean `What happens when a cluster-admin adds invalid EIPs ?`,  `What happens when a cluster-admin adds number of EIPs...`, and `- What happens when a cluster-admin adds nothing under eipAllocations ?`?

I don't understand. If you don't have `auto-delete-load-balancer` set, then you will get a `LoadBalancerProgressing` Status, yes I agree, but that status won't tell them the EIPs are invalid.

They are still going to proceed with deleting the service, and then the service will fail to provision. So what's the point of adding this predicate note of `The following questions...`? I don't think it changes anything right?

Author: Yes.

  The load balancer creation would not proceed and fail as per details mentioned in [subsection of Test Plan](#Test when Ingress Controller CR has been provided with invalid EIPAllocations.)

- What happens when a cluster-admin adds number of EIPs which are not equal to the number of public subnets for the VPC id tagged with cluster name.

  The load balancer creation would not proceed and fail as per details mentioned in [subsection of Test Plan](#test-when-ingress-controller-cr-has-been-provided-with-number-of-eips-not-equal-to-the-number-of-public-subnets-for-vpc-tagged-with-your-cluster-name)

- What happens when a cluster-admin adds nothing under eipAllocations ?
  
  The load balancer would be created with no eipAllocations and the service annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` will be removed.
  For more check [this](#Cluster admin wants operator to update the Load Balancer service for updated Ingress Controller eipAllocations)
  The NLB will get the regular IP address assigned in that case.

## Test Plan

### This EP will be covered by unit tests in the following:
- cluster-ingress-operator
- installer

> ### This  EP will also be covered by end to end tests.

Reviewer: Is there a plan to add an e2e to installer/install time/Day-0?

cc @patrickdillon @r4f4

Author: I am not sure how to add one for the installer. I need to check on this.

  in the Ingress Controller CR and then test if the Ingress Controller
  with service type load balancer with the annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`
  has value of `eipAllocations` field from the Ingress Controller CR was created.
  We will check the status of IngressController controller for LoadBalancer which is `LoadBalacerReady`, `LoadBalancerProgressing`, `IngressControllerUnavailable`
  and any errors in the cloud controller manager logs.

##### Update an Ingress Controller eipAllocations using Ingress Controller CR which already has eipAllocations set.
  The end to end test will also the cover the scenario where user updates the `eipAllocations` field
  in the Ingress Controller CR and then test if the Ingress Controller
  with service type load balancer with the annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`
  has value of `eipAllocations` field from the Ingress Controller CR was updated.
  We will check the status of IngressController controller for LoadBalancer which is `LoadBalacerReady` and `LoadBalancerProgressing`
  and the cloud controller manager logs.

>   The `LoadBalancerProgressing` should display `False` and message `"'One or more status conditions indicate progressing: LoadBalancerProgressing=True

Reviewer 5: Sorry this doesn't make sense to me. `LoadBalancerProgressing` should display `False`, and then message with `LoadBalancerProgressing=True`? Is that a mistake?

Also, this E2E test doesn't talk about deleting the service. The flow doesn't make sense, you say 1. Update `eipAllocations` 2. Check service annotation 3. Check LoadBalancerProgressing.

The service annotation isn't going to change if you haven't deleted the service.

It feels like there's a lot of fluff, but it's missing some key parts. I think you could sum this up in one sentence:
```
Update an IngressController with new `eipAllocations`, observe `LoadBalancerProgressing=True`,
deleting the LoadBalancer-type service, and observe value of
`service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`.
```

Feel free to use my E2E tests section as reference: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1595/files#diff-f8f6da2366b6e9f9eede942d6a878c8043690acb03727fad6bbf71d37c95fd92R475-R487

Author: > Sorry this doesn't make sense to me. `LoadBalancerProgressing` should display `False`, and then message with `LoadBalancerProgressing=True`? Is that a mistake?

Yes, I will correct it.

Author: Actually, after update of eip, the e2e test will just check for status message instructing the admin to manually delete the service.

I will correct it. Thanks for pointing out.

Automatic deletion will happen with auto-delete-loadbalancer annotation for which an e2e will be written.

  on the Ingress Controller, then updates the `eipAllocations` field
  in the Ingress Controller CR and then test if the Ingress Controller
  with service type load balancer with the annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`
  has value of `eipAllocations` field from the Ingress Controller CR was created.
  We will check the status of IngressController controller for LoadBalancer which is `LoadBalacerReady`, `LoadBalancerProgressing`, `IngressControllerUnavailable`
  and any errors in the cloud controller manager logs.

##### Test when Ingress Controller CR has been provided with invalid EIPAllocations. 
We will check the status of the IngressController which will have the message `The service-controller component is reporting SyncLoadBalancerFailed events like: Error syncing load balancer: failed to ensure load balancer: error creating load balancer: "AllocationIdNotFound:` for status type `LoadBalancerReady` and `Available` in the Ingress Controller object as follows: 
```yaml
  
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-20T06:37:13Z"
  message: |-

>    The service-controller component is reporting SyncLoadBalancerFailed events like: Error syncing load balancer: failed to ensure load balancer: error creating load balancer: "AllocationIdNotFound: The allocation IDs 'eipalloc-0dba74f5f9888a37a', 'eipalloc-0436f6a636851e1ce', 'eipalloc-034f3c45b2b341752', 'eipalloc-094ada3572e093006', 'eipalloc-0eeb9f39681b1a015' do not exist (Service: AmazonEC2; Status Code: 400; Error Code: InvalidAllocationID.NotFound; Request ID: 50026879-8b24-4a0f-9606-87ac22f47692; Proxy: null)\n\tstatus code: 400, request id: 740d20ff-ae98-44d6-b86e-0762a1cf9c20"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   The service-controller component is reporting SyncLoadBalancerFailed events like: Error syncing load 
   balancer: failed to ensure load balancer: error creating load balancer: "AllocationIdNotFound: The allocation 
   IDs 'eipalloc-0dba74f5f9888a37a', 'eipalloc-0436f6a636851e1ce', 'eipalloc-034f3c45b2b341752', 'eipalloc-
   094ada3572e093006', 'eipalloc-0eeb9f39681b1a015' do not exist (Service: AmazonEC2; Status Code: 400; 
   Error Code: InvalidAllocationID.NotFound; Request ID: 50026879-8b24-4a0f-9606-87ac22f47692; Proxy: 
   null)\n\tstatus code: 400, request id: 740d20ff-ae98-44d6-b86e-0762a1cf9c20"
```

Author: yes

>    The service-controller component is reporting SyncLoadBalancerFailed events like: Error syncing load balancer: failed to ensure load balancer: error creating load balancer: "AllocationIdNotFound: The allocation IDs 'eipalloc-0dba74f5f9888a37a', 'eipalloc-0436f6a636851e1ce', 'eipalloc-034f3c45b2b341752', 'eipalloc-094ada3572e093006', 'eipalloc-0eeb9f39681b1a015' do not exist (Service: AmazonEC2; Status Code: 400; Error Code: InvalidAllocationID.NotFound; Request ID: 50026879-8b24-4a0f-9606-87ac22f47692; Proxy: null)\n\tstatus code: 400, request id: 740d20ff-ae98-44d6-b86e-0762a1cf9c20"

Reviewer 5: As I mentioned in another comment, this error, and any error you can generate, should be in `Support Procedures`.

If you look at the enhancement template: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/da6500436b19e70f44834aff1b01f578b130862f/guidelines/enhancement_template.md#L441-L445

I don't think you need to list the error condition out here in `Test Plan`.

   The kube-controller-manager logs may contain more details.
  reason: SyncLoadBalancerFailed
  status: "False"
  type: LoadBalancerReady
- lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-20T06:36:43Z"
  message: LoadBalancer is not progressing
  reason: LoadBalancerNotProgressing
  status: "False"
  type: LoadBalancerProgressing
- lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-20T06:36:43Z"
  message: The DNS management policy is set to Unmanaged.
  reason: UnmanagedLoadBalancerDNS
  status: "False"
  type: DNSManaged
- lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-20T06:36:43Z"
  message: The wildcard record resource was not found.
  reason: RecordNotFound
  status: "False"
  type: DNSReady
- lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-20T06:37:16Z"
  message: |-

>   One or more status conditions indicate unavailable: LoadBalancerReady=False (SyncLoadBalancerFailed: The service-controller component is reporting SyncLoadBalancerFailed events like: Error syncing load balancer: failed to ensure load balancer: error creating load balancer: "AllocationIdNotFound: The allocation IDs 'eipalloc-0dba74f5f9888a37a', 'eipalloc-0436f6a636851e1ce', 'eipalloc-034f3c45b2b341752', 'eipalloc-094ada3572e093006', 'eipalloc-0eeb9f39681b1a015' do not exist (Service: AmazonEC2; Status Code: 400; Error Code: InvalidAllocationID.NotFound; Request ID: 50026879-8b24-4a0f-9606-87ac22f47692; Proxy: null)\n\tstatus code: 400, request id: 740d20ff-ae98-44d6-b86e-0762a1cf9c20"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  One or more status conditions indicate unavailable: LoadBalancerReady=False (SyncLoadBalancerFailed: The 
  service-controller component is reporting SyncLoadBalancerFailed events like: Error syncing load balancer:
   failed to ensure load balancer: error creating load balancer: "AllocationIdNotFound: The allocation IDs
    'eipalloc-0dba74f5f9888a37a', 'eipalloc-0436f6a636851e1ce', 'eipalloc-034f3c45b2b341752', 'eipalloc-
    094ada3572e093006', 'eipalloc-0eeb9f39681b1a015' do not exist (Service: AmazonEC2; Status Code: 400;
     Error Code: InvalidAllocationID.NotFound; Request ID: 50026879-8b24-4a0f-9606-87ac22f47692; Proxy:
      null)\n\tstatus code: 400, request id: 740d20ff-ae98-44d6-b86e-0762a1cf9c20"
```

  The kube-controller-manager logs may contain more details.)
  reason: IngressControllerUnavailable
  status: "False"
  type: Available
- lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-20T06:37:16Z"

```

##### Test when Ingress Controller CR has been provided with number of EIPs not equal to the number of public subnets for VPC tagged with your cluster name.
  We will check the status of the IngressController which will have the message `The service-controller component is reporting SyncLoadBalancerFailed events like: Error syncing load balancer: failed to ensure load balancer: error creating load balancer: Must have same number of EIP AllocationIDs (4) and SubnetIDs (5)`
  for status type `LoadBalancerReady` and `Available` in the Ingress Controller object as follows:
```yaml
- lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-20T06:40:43Z"
  message: |-

>    The service-controller component is reporting SyncLoadBalancerFailed events like: Error syncing load balancer: failed to ensure load balancer: error creating load balancer: Must have same number of EIP AllocationIDs (4) and SubnetIDs (5)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   The service-controller component is reporting SyncLoadBalancerFailed events like: Error syncing load 
   balancer: failed to ensure load balancer: error creating load balancer: Must have same number of EIP 
   AllocationIDs (4) and SubnetIDs (5)
```

Author: OK

  reason: RecordNotFound
  status: "False"
  type: DNSReady
 - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-20T06:40:43Z"
  message: |-
   One or more status conditions indicate unavailable: DeploymentAvailable=False (DeploymentUnavailable: The deployment has Available status condition set to False (reason: MinimumReplicasUnavailable) with message: Deployment does not have minimum availability.), LoadBalancerReady=False (SyncLoadBalancerFailed: The service-controller component is reporting SyncLoadBalancerFailed events like: Error syncing load balancer: failed to ensure load balancer: error creating load balancer: Must have same number of EIP AllocationIDs (4) and SubnetIDs (5)
   The kube-controller-manager logs may contain more details.)
  reason: IngressControllerUnavailable
  status: "False"
  type: Available
 - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-20T06:40:43Z"
  message: |-
   One or more status conditions indicate progressing: DeploymentRollingOut=True (DeploymentRollingOut: Waiting for router deployment rollout to finish: 0 of 2 updated replica(s) are available...
   )
  reason: IngressControllerProgressing
  status: "True"
  type: Progressing
 - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-20T06:40:43Z"

> ```

Reviewer 3: Can you add a test to see what happens if a change was made to EIPs without the auto-delete annotation, and the controller goes into Pending, but then you add the auto-delete annotation?  Does it automatically delete at that point?

Author: no it does not. annotation should be present for automatic deletion.

Reviewer 5: Hmm. I tested this in a cluster with my subnet annotation, and saw differently. I did see the service get automatically deleted.

Here's my findings: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1595#discussion_r1596193017

Author: Hi,

Yes after adding the annotation, the service does get reflected with the desired eipAllocations. I can add a e2e test for it.

- N/A. We do not plan to deprecate this feature.

## Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

During upgrade, if there are any ingress controller load balancer services which have `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`
then the Ingress Controller would make the LoadBalancerProgressing Status to True and update the message to either manually delete
and create the service or set the values of the `eipAllocations` in the Ingress Controller to values in the service annotation.

Downgrading will not change the value of the annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`.

## Version Skew Strategy

N/A

## Operational Aspects of API Extensions

- If Ingress Controller CR is provided with incorrect `eipAllocations` or if the number of `eipAllocations` does
  not match the number of public subnets for VPC ID tagged with cluster name then the Kubernetes LoadBalancer service
  will be in "Pending" as an LB won't be created in AWS. The reasons for the failure can be found in the status of the 
  Ingress Controller.

- In case of event of an issue because of this API the network edge team needs to be involved
  in.

## Support Procedures

> 

Author: >>What happens if you install a cluster with more or less EIPs than public subnets? What about if an EIP doesn't exist? I am very interested in how that will play out. Will cluster fail to install because the default IngressController is stuck in Progressing=True?

The IngressController status will show an error message regarding either eips != subnets

> 

Reviewer 5: Yes, but will it cause the installation to be stopped and marked unsuccessful?

> 

Author: yes because the cluster operators will degrade as they communicate with router

- If the service is not getting updated with the EIP annotation and the kubernetes load balancer 
   service is in `Pending` state then check the `cloud-controller-manager` logs and ingresscontroller status.
  ```sh
  oc logs <ccm pod name> -n openshift-cloud-controller-manager
  ```
  ```sh

>   oc get ingresscontroller <ingresscontroller name> -o yaml

Author: @gcs278 please check I have updated it.

>   oc get ingresscontroller <ingresscontroller name> -o yaml

Reviewer 5: Looks good thanks.

  ```

The reasons might be related to the following:
EIPs not present in the subnet of the VPC.
The number of EIP provided and the number of subnets of VPC ID don't match.
  

> - If router pods fail to run then check the following:

Author: yes.

> - If router pods fail to run then check the following:

Reviewer 5: I suppose I don't see the point in documenting how to list the logs of the router pods as a support procedure when it wouldn't help solve any bugs with this EP.

---
title: set_eip_nlb_ingress
authors:
  - miheer
reviewers:
  - Miciah
  - frobware
  - gspence
  - candace
approvers:
  - Miciah
  - frobware
  - gspence
api-approvers:
  - joel
  - deads
creation-date: 2024-03-06
last-updated: 2024-03-22
tracking-link:
  - "https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-1274"
see-also:
  - ""
replaces:
  - ""
superseded-by:
  - ""
---

> # Set AWS EIP For NLB Ingress Controller

Reviewer 3: Please define EIP at least once in this proposal.

Author: Yes added under "Proposal"

## Summary

This enhancement allow user to set AWS EIP for the NLB default or custom ingress controller.
This is a feature request to enhance the IngressController API to be able to support static IPs during
- Install time
- Custom NLB ingress controller creation 

> - Reconfiguration of the router.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand how the router is involved at all.  Should this say "Updating the IngressController"?  Andy's question then applies.

> - Reconfiguration of the router.

Author: Updating the IngressController is accurate.

## Motivation

### User Stories

- As an administrator, I want to provision EIPs and use them with an NLB IngressController.
- As a user or admin, I want to ensure EIPs are used with NLB on default router at install time.

> - As a user, I want to reconfigure default router to use EIPs.

Author: Yes the workflow has changed. We will recreate the LB.

> - As a user of OpenShift on AWS (ROSA), I want to use static IPs (and therefore AWS Elastic IPs) so that 

Reviewer 2: These roles are ambiguous.  Is the administrator or user in all cases the cluster administrator?  If there are multiple roles, can you define them?

Author: OK. From my understanding we shall have only one user i.e the cluster-admin as he is the one who is responsible for creating routers.

  I can configure appropriate firewall rules.

>   I want the default AWS Load Balancer that they use (NLB) for their router to use these EIPs.

Reviewer 2: Another one:
- As a cluster-admin who has purchased a block of public IPv4 addresses, I want to use these IP addresses, so that I can avoid [Amazon's new charge for public IP addresses](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/aws/new-aws-public-ipv4-address-charge-public-ip-insights/).

Author: thanks!

### Goals
- Users are able to use EIP for a NLB Ingress Controller.
- Users are able to create a NLB default Ingress Controller during install time with the EIPs specified during install.

> - Any existing ingress controller should be able to be reconfigured to use EIPs. 

Reviewer 3: As mentioned earlier, "reconfigure" should really be "update with restart", right?

Author: yes

Reviewer 2: I see that https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/compare/1137a8acba5a4c72ae496c34fa93b97dd18d3990..79d098963268d49c7e4b7d64ffe1e25878c2b6c0 implemented this suggestion.  

To me, "restart" implies that the router pod has to be restarted.  How about this?
```markdown
- The ELB of an existing IngressController should be able to be reconfigured to use specific EIPs by updating the IngressController CR and recreating the ELB. 
```

Author: added with slight changes.

### Non-Goals

- Creation of EIPs in AWS.
- Keep a track of changes in the EIP in the AWS environment.
- Static IP usage with NLBs for API server.

## Proposal

In this enhancement we would be adding API fields in the installer and the ingress controller CRD
to set the AWS EIP for the NLB Ingress Controller. The cluster ingress operator will then create 
the ingress controller and get the EIP assigned to the service LoadBalancer with the annotation 

> `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`

Reviewer 3: Can you add a note about why the annotation is in kubernetes.io rather than openshift.io?

Reviewer 2: Looks like this was addressed in https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/compare/1137a8acba5a4c72ae496c34fa93b97dd18d3990..79d098963268d49c7e4b7d64ffe1e25878c2b6c0.  However, that change uses `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` as the target of a link, which will not work.  Better to use https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/labels-annotations-taints/#service-beta-kubernetes-io-aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations as a documentation reference.

### Workflow Description

**cluster administrator** is a human user responsible for deploying a
cluster. A cluster administrator also has the rights to modify the cluster level components.

#### Set EIP using an installer:

> 1. Cluster administrator creates adds the following in the install-config.yaml

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Cluster administrator creates or adds the following in the install-config.yaml
```

Author: updated in a different way

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
baseDomain: example.com
metadata:
  name: test-cluster
platform:
  aws:
    region: us-west-2
    lbType: NLB
      networkLoadBalancer:

>         eip-allocations: eipalloc-<redacted>,eipalloc-<redacted>,eipalloc-<redacted>,eipalloc-<redacted>,eipalloc-<redacted> 

Reviewer 3: Mentioned later, eipAllocations or EIPAllocations is more conventional than eip-allocations.

Author: OK can we discuss this on the API PR https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1826. ?

Reviewer 3: @miheer it looks like you already removed the `-` from the variable name in that PR.

Author: yes I have changed to `eipAllocations`.

    subnets:
    - subnet-1
    - subnet-2

>     - subnet-3

Author: One option is we can add a field to mention the number of public subnets. Then using CEL at API level we could try to compare the number of eip-allocations they provided and the the number of public subnets

>     - subnet-3

Author: Or I think we may put this as a Non-Goal for this EP.

>     - subnet-3

Reviewer 2: Andy said "in the installation process".  Validation to ensure installation succeeds can be done by the installer.

>     - subnet-3

Author: I added this point in the Open Questions

pullSecret: '{"auths": ...}'
sshKey: ssh-ed25519 AAAA...
```  
2. The installer will create the cluster ingress config object as follows:
```yaml
 oc edit ingress.config/cluster -o yaml
 # Please edit the object below. Lines beginning with a '#' will be ignored,
 # and an empty file will abort the edit. If an error occurs while saving this file will be
 # reopened with the relevant failures.

>  #

Author: yes

 apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
 kind: Ingress
 metadata:
   creationTimestamp: "2022-08-30T01:03:17Z"
   generation: 11
   name: cluster
   resourceVersion: "60888"
   uid: de89cc95-449e-4ae5-a837-f4171fe61e36
 spec:
   domain: apps.testnlbapi.devcluster.openshift.com
   loadBalancer:
     platform:
       aws:
         type: NLB
           networkLoadBalancer:

>              eip-allocations: eipalloc-<redacted>,eipalloc-<redacted>,eipalloc-<redacted>,eipalloc-<redacted>,eipalloc-<redacted>

Author: yes

>        type: AWS

Reviewer 3: What happens to the subnets added in the installer config?

Author: Addition of subnets is a different EP. However the eips should match the number of `public subnets`.

Reviewer 3: @miheer I don't think it is acceptable for that to be a user responsibility.  We will need to add some validations to make sure the number of public subnets matches the number of EIPs.  cc @Miciah for feedback.

Reviewer 2: We need to distinguish between these cases:

- The cluster-admin specified invalid EIPs in `install-config.yaml` at installation time (day 0).
- The cluster-admin specified invalid EIPs in `ingresses.config.openshift.io/cluster` or an IngressController CR (day 2).

It seems to me that the installer can feasibly validate the install config for day 0 (but better verify that with the Installer team).  However, it is impractical to add API validation for day 2 as validating `eipAllocations` requires listing EIPs using the AWS API, which is not something we can do with CEL (it's not something we would typically do even with an admission plugin or webhook).  In my opinion, given the constraints and the fact that this the workflow already requires active participation by the cluster-admin, it is reasonable to put the burden on the cluster-admin to verify that the EIPs match up with public subnets, as long as we **clearly document** this expectation.  If there is a mismatch, then cloud-provider-aws and cloud-controller-manager's service manager will report an error, and cluster-ingress-operator should reflect this error to the IngressController CR's status.

Author: second point is already covered in Open Questions

Author: first point is added in the `Open Questions` as I need to verify this with the installer team.

 status:
   componentRoutes:
```
3. Ingress Operator will create the default ingress controller with the service type load balancer having the service annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`.

> #### Create an Ingress Controller using Ingress Controller CR and assign the EIP allocation mentioned in the Ingress Controller CR.

Reviewer 3: Is this a part of the previous workflow?  It would be better to group them together if so.

Author: This is a different workflow. Day Two we can say i.e after installation.

1. Cluster administrator creates an Ingress Controller:
```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: IngressController
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: null
  name: test
  namespace: openshift-ingress-operator
spec:
  endpointPublishingStrategy:
    loadBalancer:
      scope: External
      providerParameters:
        type: AWS
        aws:
          type: NLB
          networkLoadBalancer:
            eip-allocations: eipalloc-<redacted>,eipalloc-<redacted>,eipalloc-<redacted>,eipalloc-<redacted>,eipalloc-<redacted>
    type: LoadBalancerService
```

Ingress Operator will create an NLB Ingress Controller called `test` with the service type load balancer having the service annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`
populated with the value from the eip-allocations field.

> #### Cluster administrator adds eip-allocations field the existing ingress controller

Author: > Do I read this heading as?
> 
> ```
> #### Manually Adding EIP Allocations to a new Ingress Controller CR
> ```
> 
Yes.

> The intent here is to convey how a cluster administrator would manually achieve what the installer would automatically do?

Yes.

> #### Cluster administrator adds eip-allocations field the existing ingress controller

Reviewer 3: Is this a distinct operation, not a part of the previous workflow?

> #### Cluster administrator adds eip-allocations field the existing ingress controller

Author: Yes. the previous one is using installer

> #### Cluster administrator adds eip-allocations field the existing ingress controller

Author: > Do I read this heading as?
> 
> ```
> #### Manually Adding EIP Allocations to a new Ingress Controller CR
> ```
> 
> The intent here is to convey how a cluster administrator would manually achieve what the installer would automatically do?

I have added this `#### Create an Ingress Controller using Ingress Controller CR and assign the EIP allocation mentioned in the CR to the kubernetes Load Balancer service for the Ingress Controller.`

Ingress Operator will create an NLB Ingress Controller with the service type load balancer having the service annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`
populated with the value from the eip-allocations field.

> #### Cluster administrator updates eip-allocations field the existing ingress controller

Author: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1593#discussion_r1544991664

> #### Cluster administrator updates eip-allocations field the existing ingress controller

Author: Yes we need to recreate it. The workflow has changed. I have updated the EP.

Ingress Operator will update an NLB Ingress Controller with the service type load balancer having the service annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`
populated with the value from the eip-allocations field.

> ### API Extensions

Reviewer 3: Can you put this prior to Workflow descriptions, so the reader understands what is being changed?

Author: I did not get it. However the text has been changed now.

Reviewer 3: Please see https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1593/files#r1581285577 and let me know if you need further instructions.

Author: I have copied API extensions above Workflow descriptions

> - The API for setting `eip-allocations` field in the installer-config will look as follows in the file `pkg/types/aws/platform.go`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Change the Platform type in the file `pkg/types/aws/platform.go`:
```

Reviewer 3: What repo holds this file?

Author: ok added

Reviewer 2: It's best to provide a GitHub permalink to the relevant source code.

Author: done

```go
// Platform stores all the global configuration that all machinesets
// use.
type Platform struct {
...
    // https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonECS/latest/developerguide/load-balancer-types.html#nlb 
    // +optional 
    LBType configv1.AWSLBType `json:"lbType,omitempty"`

    // networkLoadBalancerParameters holds configuration parameters for an AWS
    // network load balancer. Present only if type is NLB.
    //
    // +optional
    NetworkLoadBalancerParameters *configv1.AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters `json:"networkLoadBalancer,omitempty"`
}

```

> - The API for the `eip-allocations` field in the ingress cluster object to store the value of the
>   field `eip-allocations` from the installer which the ingress operator uses to create the ingress controller
>   will look as follows in the file `config/v1/types_ingress.go`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Change the AWSIngressSpec type in the file `config/v1/types_ingress.go`:
```

Author: But this does not explain the process.

Reviewer 3: The wording was not clear.  Maybe something like "The installer will propagae the EIP allocations to the cluster ingress configuration"?

Author: i modified it to ` The installer will propagate the eipAllocations to the cluster ingress configuration which the ingress operator uses to create the default Ingress Controller
  will look as follows in the file `config/v1/types_ingress.go` of `openshift/api` github repo:`

```go
// AWSIngressSpec holds the desired state of the Ingress for Amazon Web Services infrastructure provider.
// This only includes fields that can be modified in the cluster.
// +union
type AWSIngressSpec struct {
...
    // +unionDiscriminator
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Enum:=NLB;Classic
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required

>     Type AWSLBType `json:"type,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Type AWSLBType `json:"lbType,omitempty"`
```

>     Type AWSLBType `json:"type,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: If you're not changing anything in Type, don't include it here.

Author: OK

Author: I have put it there as I have added a CEL which checks it.

    // networkLoadBalancerParameters holds configuration parameters for an AWS
    // network load balancer. Present only if type is NLB.
    //
    // +optional

>     NetworkLoadBalancerParameters *AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters `json:"networkLoadBalancer,omitempty"`

Author: I am follwing the same convention we used for classicLoadBalancer

>     NetworkLoadBalancerParameters *AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters `json:"networkLoadBalancer,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: There should be a "parameters" at the end of the variable name, even if we didn't do that for classic.

>     NetworkLoadBalancerParameters *AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters `json:"networkLoadBalancer,omitempty"`

Author: OK I will add it here and may be we can discuss in API PR

>     NetworkLoadBalancerParameters *AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters `json:"networkLoadBalancer,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: My request to change this was invalid.

}

// AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters holds configuration parameters for an
// AWS Network load balancer.
type AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters struct {

>     EIPAllocations EIPAllocations `json:"eip-allocations,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: Better json name would be `eipAllocations`.  Using a `-` is very unconventional.

}

> type EIPAllocations string

Reviewer 3: Why a string instead of a string array?

Author: yeah I have added an array in the API just forgot to reflect it here.

```

- The API field for `eip-allocations` field in the Ingress Controller CR needs to be set as follows
  in the file `operator/v1/types_ingress.go`:
```go
// AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters holds configuration parameters for an
// AWS Network load balancer.
type AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters struct {
    EIPAllocations EIPAllocations `json:"eip-allocations,omitempty"`        
}

type EIPAllocations string

> ```

Author: We can do something like this
// AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters holds configuration parameters for an
// AWS Network load balancer.
type AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters struct {
	EIPAllocations configv1.EIPAllocations `json:"eip-allocations,omitempty"`
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: I believe this info isn't needed in operator/v1/types_ingress.go

> ```

Author: not sure what you mean please check https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1826/commits/261093f2b1ea2e427f113bcc4f4b0d3c1aca6d5a#diff-891d2cdcb01603ef2a2c1bfb2f6ef32cf2acf8b1471871a5a6e27308d50050f9R641

> ```

Reviewer 3: Okay, my confusion was because the struct was empty to begin with.  I thought you were adding a new struct type.  Btw, your api PR shows this as a slice:

```
type AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters struct {
	EIPAllocations []configv1.EIPAllocations `json:"eipAllocations,omitempty"`
}
```

> ```

Author: OK so I hope your question is answered.

### Topology Considerations

#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes

Currently, there is no unique consideration for making this change work with Hypershift.

#### Standalone Clusters

> Is the change relevant for standalone clusters?

Reviewer 3: Is this an open question?

Author: No.

Author: updated it.

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift

> This proposal does not affect the resource consumption of a
> single-node OpenShift deployment (SNO), CPU and memory.
> 
> This proposal does not affect MicroShift. The proposal
> adds configuration options through API resources and the installer however, it is not
> required for any of those behaviors to be exposed to MicroShift admins through the
> configuration file for MicroShift.

Reviewer 3: Is this what you mean?
```suggestion
This proposal does not affect the CPU or memory consumption of a
single-node OpenShift deployment (SNO).

This proposal does not apply to MicroShift. Setting an EIP for NLB is not supported on MicroShift.
```

Author: No updated it.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

#### 1. Set EIP through installer for the default ingress controller:
   
   a. The admin sets the `eip-allocations` in the installer using the install-config.yaml.
   
   b. The installer then sets the ingress cluster object with the `eip-allocations`.
   
   c. The cluster ingress operator then creates a default ingress controller by:

     i.   creating an default ingress controller CR
     

>      ii.  then scaling a deployment for the Ingress Controller CR which has the value of the `eip-allocations`.

Reviewer 3: The value?  In what sense?

Author: I have updated this sentence.

>      iii. then creating a service with service type load balancer with annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     iii. then creating a service of type load balancer with the annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`,
```

Author: done

          which uses the value from the field `eip-allocations` of ingress controller CR.

#### 2. Set EIP through the Ingress Controller CRD:
   
   The admin sets the `eip-allocations` in the Ingress Controller CR. Then same process

>    as per point 1.c.ii and 1.c.iii is followed by the ingress operator. 

Reviewer 3: It creates another, or it updates the default?

Author: it creates a new one for the ingress controller CR

Reviewer 3: Please see https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1593/files#r1581456921

Author: not able to access the link.

> #### 3. Update the existing EIP for the IngressController:

Author: No. We need to recreate the LB service i.e create and recreate. May be we can ask this in the `Open Questions` whether we shall be adding an update option or we can put a note in the docs saying this can cause outage for sometime.

> #### 3. Update the existing EIP for the IngressController:

Author: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1593#discussion_r1544991664

> #### 3. Update the existing EIP for the IngressController:

Author: @frobware we need to recreate the LB service.

   
   When the admin changes the eip-allocations field in the Ingress Controller CR, the watch on the

>    `eip-allocations` field by the ingress operator scales a new deployment for the Ingress Controller CR.

Reviewer 7: Oh, so if you change the EIP allocations then you get a "brand new" ingresscontroller? That might be surprising as it will drop all traffic. Seems subtle.

Author: Yeah, after testing I saw we can't get the annotations changed on the fly. If someone wants to update the eip-allocations  then service will have to deleted and then recreated with the new value for `eip-allocations` field.

Author: @frobware I need to test again. It looks like if the service is updated with the annotation the kcm should update the eips. https://github.com/brooksgarrett/kubernetes/blob/72dd54ec4856ccb7bd2b08258d95f3d0b932fb11/pkg/cloudprovider/providers/aws/aws.go#L4157

Reviewer 2: It looks like https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/compare/45ad01df72b72174f9347fcb54179af4661cbd19..1137a8acba5a4c72ae496c34fa93b97dd18d3990 resolved this question by removing "scales a new deployment" and instead describing the workflow for recreating the service.

   Then step 1.c.iii is followed by the ingress operator.

   
### Risks and Mitigations

Providing a right range of EIP as per AWS guidelines is an admin responsibility.

> If they are not provided the router won't get assigned an IP which can cause communication outage.

Author: Yes the update fails however the LB creation fails as the kubernetes Load balancer service for the ingress controller goes into pending state as CCM is not able to attach an LB to the service.

> If they are not provided the router won't get assigned an IP which can cause communication outage.

Reviewer 2: What does "If they are not provided" mean?  Does that mean "if an invalid or non-existent EIP is provided", or does it mean "if no EIPs are provided"?  I would interpret it as the latter, but if no EIPs are provided, isn't that the status quo?  That is, doesn't the ELB  just get a regular IP address assigned in that case?

> If they are not provided the router won't get assigned an IP which can cause communication outage.

Author: no it does not mean "if no EIPs are provided". It really means if the user provides an invalid/inaccurate EIP which does not exist or is not created in the AWS enviroment.

if no eips are provided, the NLB will get a regular IP address assigned in that case

> If they are not provided the router won't get assigned an IP which can cause communication outage.

Author: I have updated the text.

As of now we are not able to identify any more risks which can affect other components of the EP.

### Drawbacks

Currently, there are not any drawbacks as such for this EP.

## Open Questions

1. Shall we support updating EIP in the NLB Ingress Controller ?

> Yes, we will support updating the EIP in the custom ingress controller.

Reviewer 3: If we only support updating EIP in a custom ingress controller (not the default), then the answer is not "Yes".
```suggestion
We will only support updating the EIP in a custom ingress controller, not the default.
```

Author: We support updating EIP in the default Ingress controller which is Classic.

## Test Plan

- This EP will be covered by unit tests.

- This  EP will also be covered by end to end tests.
  
  The end to end test will cover the scenario where user will set an `eip-allocations` field
  in the Ingress Controller CR and then test if the Ingress Controller
  with service type load balancer with the annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`
  has value of `eip-allocations` field from the Ingress Controller CR was created.

  The end to end test will also the cover the scenario where user updates the `eip-allocations` field
  in the Ingress Controller CR and then test if the Ingress Controller
  with service type load balancer with the annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`
  has value of `eip-allocations` field from the Ingress Controller CR was updated.

>   

Reviewer 7: Is there a plan for testing when the EIP allocations are plumbed in the install-config.yaml?

Author: There will be unit tests in the installer.

## Graduation Criteria

### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

- N/A

### Tech Preview -> GA

- N/A

### Removing a deprecated feature

- N/A

## Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

> During upgrade, user should be able to populate the eip_allocations_field via installer

Reviewer 7: If EIP allocations are only reconciled at creation time can this work? The cluster is upgrading which implies it has a deployed ingresscontroller.

Author: Yes you are right. During the upgrade we won't have this option for populating the field. So, the cluster admin will have to set the `eip-allocations` field once the cluster is installed.

During downgrade, the EIPs won't be allocated to the ingress controller's load balancer service.

## Version Skew Strategy

N/A

## Operational Aspects of API Extensions

- If the Ingress Operator can't scale an Ingress Controller with `eip-allocations` then

>   there can be an outage as all the communications to the router will fail.

Reviewer 3: The update should fail with an error rather than causing the router to fail.

Author: Yes, the progressing status will give a message to delete the LB service manually.

Reviewer 2: What does "scale an Ingress Controller" mean?  Are you saying the cluster-admin has an IngressController that specifies valid `eipAllocations`, and then the cluster-admin changes this IngressController's `spec.replicas` value?  Or are you saying "scale" to mean adding or removing an EIP from `eipAllocations`?

Author: just updated
- If Ingress Controller CR is provided with incorrect `eipAllocations` or if the number of `eipAllocations` does
  not match the number of public subnets for VPC ID tagged with cluster name then the Kubernetes LoadBalancer service will be in "Pending" as an LB won't be created in AWS. The reasons for the failure can be found in the status of the  Ingress Controller.

- In case of event of an outage because of this API the network edge team needs to be involved
  in.

## Support Procedures

- If the service is not getting updated with the EIP annotation check the `kube-controller-manager` logs.
  ```sh
  oc logs <kcm pod name> -n openshift-kube-controller-manager
  ```
- If router pods fail to run then check the following:
   - `Ingress Controller` logs.
  ```sh

>   oc logs <ingress pod name> -n openshift-ingress

Reviewer 3: Do you mean this?
```suggestion
  oc logs <router pod name> -n openshift-ingress
```

Author: yes. I think ingress is also right ?

Reviewer 2: The term "ingress" is overloaded.  I would have asked for clarification if Candace hadn't.  Better to use "router pod" as it is the term we usually use is more obviously a reference to the pods that have "router" in the names.

Author: OK

---
title: set_eip_nlb_ingress
authors:
  - miheer
reviewers:
  - Miciah
  - frobware
  - gspence
  - candace
approvers:
  - Miciah
  - frobware
  - gspence
api-approvers:
  - joel
  - deads
creation-date: 2024-03-06
last-updated: 2024-05-13
tracking-link:
  - "https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-1274"
see-also:
  - ""
replaces:
  - ""
superseded-by:
  - ""
---

# Set AWS EIP For NLB IngressController

## Summary

This enhancement allows a user to configure AWS Elastic IP(EIP) for an AWS Network Load Balancer(NLB) default or custom IngressController.
This is a feature request to enhance the IngressController API to be able to support static IPs during
- Custom NLB IngressController creation 
- Reconfiguration of the custom and default router to NLB with EIP allocation.

> ## Motivation

Reviewer 3: No motivation?  How about something like this from the RFE:

```suggestion
## Motivation

Users/customers of OpenShift on AWS (ROSA) want to use static IPs (e.g., AWS Elastic IPs) to configure IP-based firewall rules. The default AWS Load Balancer for their router requires these EIPs.
```

### User Stories

- As a cluster administrator, I want to provision EIPs and use them with an NLB IngressController.
- As a cluster administrator, I want to reconfigure default router to use EIPs.
- As a cluster administrator of OpenShift on AWS (ROSA), I want to use static IPs (and therefore AWS Elastic IPs) so that 
  I can configure appropriate firewall rules.
  I want the default AWS Load Balancer that they use (NLB) for their router to use these EIPs.
- As a cluster administrator who has purchased a block of public IPv4 addresses, I want to use these IP addresses, so 
  that I can avoid Amazon's new charge for public IP addresses.

### Goals

> - Users are able to use EIP for a NLB `IngressController`.

Reviewer 3: nit
```suggestion
- Users are able to use EIPs for an NLB `IngressController`.
```

- The load balancer of an existing `IngressController` can be reconfigured to use specific EIPs by updating the `IngressController` specification and recreating the load balancer as type NLB.

### Non-Goals

- Creation of EIPs in AWS.
- Monitoring or management of changes to EIPs in the AWS environment.
- Static IP usage with NLBs for OpenShift API server.
- Check the number of public subnets available in AWS environment and then compare number of subnets
  with the number of EIPs the user provides. Note - If subnets are provided in the IngressController CR

>   we do compare the subnets with the number of eipAllocations provided in the IngressController CR. 

Reviewer 3: I would move this note up to the Goal section:
```
The number of subnets provided in the default IngressController specification will be validated to ensure it matches the number of eipAllocations.
```

Reviewer 3: Also, the RFE is asking for an installation option, so you should point that out as a **non-goal** of this enhancement since it was moved out of this enhancement.

## Proposal

EIP = AWS Elastic IP, NLB = AWS Network LoadBalancer, AZ = Availability Zone 

This enhancement adds API fields in the IngressController specification
to set the AWS EIP for the NLB `IngressController`. The cluster ingress operator will then create 
the `IngressController` and get the EIP assigned to the service LoadBalancer with the annotation 
`service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`
Note: `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` is a standard [Kubernetes service annotation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/labels-annotations-taints/#service-beta-kubernetes-io-aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations)

### API Extensions

> The IngressController API is extended by adding an optional parameter EIPAllocations of type []EIPAllocation to the AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters struct,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The IngressController API is extended by adding an optional parameter `EIPAllocations` of type `[]EIPAllocation` to the `AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters` struct,
```

// + Explanation of the regex `^eipalloc-[0-9a-fA-F]{17}$` for validating value of the EIPAllocation:
// + ^eipalloc- ensures the string starts with "eipalloc-".
// + [0-9a-fA-F]{17} matches exactly 17 hexadecimal characters (0-9, a-f, A-F).
// + $ ensures the string ends after the 17 hexadecimal characters.
// + Example of Valid and Invalid values:
// + eipalloc-1234567890abcdef1 is valid.
// + eipalloc-1234567890abcde is not valid (too short).
// + eipalloc-1234567890abcdefg is not valid (contains a non-hex character 'g').
// + Max length is calculated as follows:
// + eipalloc- = 9 chars and 17 hexadecimal chars after `-`
// + So, total is 17 + 9 = 26 chars required for value of an EIPAllocation.
//
// +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=26
// +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=26
// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule=`self.startsWith('eipalloc-')`,message="eipAllocations should start with 'eipalloc-'"
// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule=`self.split("-", 2)[1].matches('[0-9a-fA-F]{17}$')`,message="eipAllocations must be 'eipalloc-' followed by exactly 17 hexadecimal characters (0-9, a-f, A-F)"
type EIPAllocation string
```

### Workflow Description

> Pre-requisites: One must allocate an Elastic IP address from [Amazon's pool of public IPv4 addresses](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/elastic-ip-addresses-eip.html#using-instance-addressing-eips-allocating),

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
####Pre-requisites 

One must allocate an Elastic IP address from [Amazon's pool of public IPv4 addresses](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/elastic-ip-addresses-eip.html#using-instance-addressing-eips-allocating),
```

or from a custom IP address pool that you have brought to your AWS account. For more information about bringing your own IP address range to your 
AWS account, see [Bring your own IP addresses (BYOIP) in Amazon EC2](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/ec2-byoip.html)
which could be then used in the `eipAllocations` field of the IngressController CR.

> Note: The AWS account has some cap on the number of EIPs per region. By default, all AWS accounts have a quota of five (5) Elastic IP addresses per Region, because public (IPv4) 
> internet addresses are a scarce public resource. For more details please check [Elastic IP address quota](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/elastic-ip-addresses-eip.html#using-instance-addressing-limit).
> When this cap is hit you will get the following error: `Elastic IP address could not be allocated.
> The maximum number of addresses has been reached.`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note: All AWS accounts have a quota of five (5) Elastic IP addresses per Region, because public (IPv4) 
internet addresses are a scarce public resource. For more details please check [Elastic IP address quota](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/elastic-ip-addresses-eip.html#using-instance-addressing-limit).
When this cap is hit you will get the following error: `Elastic IP address could not be allocated.
The maximum number of addresses has been reached.`
```

Elastic IP Allocation can only be done for internet-facing NLB.

> The administrator needs to know how many public subnets the AWS VPC ID which is tagged by cluster name after installation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The administrator needs to know how many public subnets are in the AWS VPC ID for this cluster.
```

> The administrator needs to know how many public subnets the AWS VPC ID which is tagged by cluster name after installation.
> 
> To locate the public subnets:
> 
> Navigate to your AWS Web Console for the account that contains the cluster
> Go to Your VPCs under the Virtual Public Cloud section
> Search for the VPC ID tagged with cluster name using the command oc get infrastructure cluster -o jsonpath='{.status.infrastructureName}'
> Click the VPC ID link for the VPC
> Click the link under Main route table and then check the column Explicit subnet associations which will show you the number of public subnets available for that VPC ID.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Yhe administrator needs to know how many public subnets are in the AWS VPC ID for this cluster.  To locate the public subnets follow these steps:

- Navigate to your AWS Web Console for the account that contains the cluster
- Go to **Your VPCs** under the Virtual Public Cloud section
- Search for the VPC ID tagged with cluster name using the command ```oc get infrastructure cluster -o jsonpath='{.status.infrastructureName}```
- Click the VPC ID link for the VPC
- Click the link under Main route table and then check the column **Explicit subnet associations** which will show you the number of public subnets available for that VPC ID.
```

One can try these scripts present [here](https://github.com/frobware/haproxy-hacks/tree/master/NE-1398) as well.

> **cluster administrator** is a human user responsible for deploying a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the following operational examples, a **cluster administrator** is a human user responsible for deploying a
```

cluster. A cluster administrator also has the rights to modify the cluster level components.

> #### Create an IngressController using IngressController custom resource and assign the EIP allocation to the Kubernetes load balancer service for this IngressController.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Create an IngressController

Create an IngressController using the IngressController custom resource and assign the EIP allocation to the Kubernetes load balancer service for this IngressController.
```

1. Cluster administrator creates an `IngressController`:
```yaml
 % cat custom-eip-cr.yaml
 apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
 kind: IngressController
 metadata:
   creationTimestamp: null
   name: test
   namespace: openshift-ingress-operator
 spec:
   domain: test.apps.eip.devcluster.openshift.com
   endpointPublishingStrategy:
     loadBalancer:
       scope: External
       providerParameters:
         type: AWS
         aws:
           type: NLB
           networkLoadBalancer:
             eipAllocations:

>                - eipalloc-0956fea34de4cb7ab
>                - eipalloc-0e9a3077a70de050a
>                - eipalloc-0b69fc4691f54cdd0
>                - eipalloc-01e6ba6cbba1a391b
>                - eipalloc-0e242df173f906112

Reviewer 3: The slice members need indentation fixed:
```suggestion
             - eipalloc-0956fea34de4cb7ab
             - eipalloc-0e9a3077a70de050a
             - eipalloc-0b69fc4691f54cdd0
             - eipalloc-01e6ba6cbba1a391b
             - eipalloc-0e242df173f906112
```

    reason: LoadBalancerNotProgressing
    status: "False"
    type: LoadBalancerProgressing
...
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-10T00:20:50Z"
    status: "True"
    type: Available
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-10T00:20:50Z"
    status: "False"
    type: Progressing
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-10T00:20:50Z"
    status: "False"
    type: Degraded
...
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-10T00:20:17Z"
    message: No evaluation condition is detected.
    reason: NoEvaluationCondition
    status: "False"
    type: EvaluationConditionsDetected
  domain: test.apps.eip.devcluster.openshift.com
  endpointPublishingStrategy:
    loadBalancer:
      dnsManagementPolicy: Managed
      providerParameters:
        aws:
          networkLoadBalancer:
            eipAllocations:
            - eipalloc-0956fea34de4cb7ab
            - eipalloc-0e9a3077a70de050a
            - eipalloc-0b69fc4691f54cdd0
            - eipalloc-01e6ba6cbba1a391b
            - eipalloc-0e242df173f906112
          type: NLB
        type: AWS
      scope: External
    type: LoadBalancerService
  observedGeneration: 2
  selector: ingresscontroller.operator.openshift.io/deployment-ingresscontroller=test
...
```

> The router-test service will now show the updated service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations annotation values.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The router-test service will now show the updated `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations annotation` values.
```

```yaml
 % oc get svc router-test -n openshift-ingress -o yaml
 apiVersion: v1
 kind: Service
 metadata:
   annotations:
     service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations: eipalloc-0956fea34de4cb7ab,eipalloc-0e9a3077a70de050a,eipalloc-0b69fc4691f54cdd0,eipalloc-01e6ba6cbba1a391b,eipalloc-0e242df173f906112
...
   name: router-test
   namespace: openshift-ingress
...
 spec:
...
   type: LoadBalancer
 status:
   loadBalancer:
     ingress:
       - hostname: a812fb12c893244bc87fdc257b7c0a45-e77e94821922b90d.elb.us-east-1.amazonaws.com
```

> #### Cluster administrator updates eipAllocations field of the existing IngressController

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Cluster administrator updates eipAllocations 
```

> AWS platform requires deleting and recreating a load balancer to change its EIPs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you need to update the EIPs on an existing IngressController, be aware that the AWS platform requires deleting and recreating a load balancer to change its assigned EIPs.
```

       reason: IngressControllerProgressing
       status: "True"
       type: Progressing
     - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-10T00:20:50Z"
       status: "False"
       type: Degraded
...
   domain: test.apps.eip.devcluster.openshift.com
   endpointPublishingStrategy:
     loadBalancer:
       dnsManagementPolicy: Managed
       providerParameters:
         aws:
           networkLoadBalancer:
             eipAllocations:
               - eipalloc-0956fea34de4cb7ab
               - eipalloc-0e9a3077a70de050a
               - eipalloc-0b69fc4691f54cdd0
               - eipalloc-01e6ba6cbba1a391b
               - eipalloc-0e242df173f906112
           type: NLB
         type: AWS
       scope: External
     type: LoadBalancerService
...

```

#### Cluster admin wants operator to automatically effectuate the Load Balancer service for updated IngressController eipAllocations 

> The administrator can tell the Ingress Operator to complete the disruptive update of the service automatically

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unlike the previous example, the administrator has the option to automatically complete the disruptive update of the service 
```

by annotating the IngressController with the annotation called `ingress.operator.openshift.io/auto-delete-load-balancer` 

> and then changing the eipAllocations by using the following commands:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.
```

> Annotate `IngressController` with `ingress.operator.openshift.io/auto-delete-load-balancer` with a blank value.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First, annotate `IngressController` with `ingress.operator.openshift.io/auto-delete-load-balancer` with a blank value.
```

```sh
oc -n openshift-ingress-operator annotate ingresscontrollers/test ingress.operator.openshift.io/auto-delete-load-balancer=
```

> Update the `IngressController` with the following command:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Then update the `IngressController`.
```

```sh
% oc -n openshift-ingress-operator patch ingresscontrollers/default --type=merge --patch='{"spec":{"endpointPublishingStrategy":{"type":"LoadBalancerService","loadBalancer":{"providerParameters":{"type":"AWS","aws":{"type":"NLB","nlbParameters":{"eipAllocations":[]}}}}}}}'
```

> After the changes are saved, the operator will delete and create the load balancer service automatically.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After the changes are saved, the operator will automatically delete and create the load balancer service.
```

   is set on the LoadBalancer-type service managed by the IngressController.
2. The cluster admin upgrades OpenShift to v4.y and the service annotation is not
   changed or removed. For more details see [section](#4-any-change-to-the-service-annotation-does-not-trigger-the-operator-to-manage-the-load-balancer-service)  
3. After upgrading, the IngressController will emit a `LoadBalancerProgressing` condition
   with `Status: True` because the spec's `EIPAllocations` (an empty slice `[]`) does not equal
   the current annotation.
4. In this case, the cluster admin must directly update
   `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.networkLoadBalancerParameters.eipAllocations` to the
   current value of the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` service.
5. The Ingress Operator will resolve the `LoadBalancerProgressing` condition back to
   `Status: False` as long as `EIPAllocations` is equivalent to `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`.

#### Updating EIP in the default Classic IngressController after installation

> We support updating the EIP in the default Classic `IngressController`.

Reviewer 3: Don't use the word "support" in an EP, people may get the wrong idea.  
However, I thought this EP was only for NLBs.

    service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations: eipalloc-0956fea34de4cb7ab,eipalloc-0e9a3077a70de050a,eipalloc-0b69fc4691f54cdd0,eipalloc-01e6ba6cbba1a391b,eipalloc-0e242df173f906112
...
  type: LoadBalancer
status:
  loadBalancer:
    ingress:
    - hostname: a8491585620154d5992dcdecc06c5779-7938285b62f7bebe.elb.us-east-1.amazonaws.com
```

### Topology Considerations

#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes

Currently, there is no unique consideration for making this change work with Hypershift.

#### Standalone Clusters

This proposal does not have any special implications for standalone clusters.

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift

This proposal does not have any special implications for single-node
deployments or MicroShift.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

The process in general works as follows:
- cluster-admin sets spec.
- desiredLoadBalancerService sets the annotation based on spec.
- syncIngressControllerStatus sets status based on the annotation.

If the cluster-admin manually sets the annotation, then in that case syncIngressControllerStatus will reflect it to status.
More details on the implementation are as follows:

> #### 1. Create a new IngressController with EIPs:

Reviewer 3: If this is implmentation details for a custom (not default) IngressController, you should say:
```suggestion
#### 1. When creating a customer IngressController with EIPs:
```

>    The admin sets the `eipAllocations` in the `IngressController` CR. The cluster ingress operator then creates a `IngressController` by:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   The cluster admin sets the `eipAllocations` in the `IngressController` CR. The cluster ingress operator then creates a new  `IngressController` by:
```

   1. scaling a deployment for the `IngressController` CR which has the value of the `eipAllocations` from the
      ingress cluster object.
   2. then creating a service of service type load balancer with the annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`,
      which uses the value from the field `eipAllocations` of `IngressController` CR.  

> #### 2. Update the EIP for an existing IngressController:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### 2. When changing the EIPs for an existing IngressController:
```

>    ##### Effectuating EIP Updates using manual method:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are two implementations that cover the modification of EIPs in an existing IngressController, manual and automatic.

   ##### Manual:
```

>    When the admin changes the eipAllocations field in the `IngressController` CR, the ingress operator sets the Load Balancer

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   When the cluster admin changes the eipAllocations field in the `IngressController` specification, the ingress operator sets the Load Balancer
```

>    Progressing status as per [section](#cluster-administrator-updates-eipallocations-field-of-the-existing-ingress-controller).

Reviewer 3: Broken link.

>    The cluster admin has to manually delete service in order to effectuate the change.
>    Then step 1.2 is followed by the ingress operator.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   The cluster admin manually deletes the service when they are ready for the ensuing service interruption.
   The rest of the service configuration will happen automatically.
```

   We have intentionally designed this feature to require manual deletion of the service for the following reasons:

   Reason #1: To mitigate risks associated with cluster admins providing an invalid annotation value.

>    While the AWS Cloud Controller Manager (CCM) handles invalid annotations by producing errors and events, it is difficult 
>    for the Ingress Operator to decipher these CCM events after the load balancer has been provisioned. 

Reviewer 3: "it is difficult" doesn't say much, and stands out as a flaw.  Can it be reworded as:

```suggestion
   While the AWS Cloud Controller Manager (CCM) handles invalid annotations by producing errors and events, it doesn't provide enough information 
   for the Ingress Operator to decipher these CCM events after the load balancer has been provisioned. 
```
```suggestion
   While the AWS Cloud Controller Manager (CCM) handles invalid annotations by producing errors and events, it is difficult 
   for the Ingress Operator to decipher these CCM events after the load balancer has been provisioned. 
```

   Therefore, the Ingress Operator can't indicate to a cluster admin that an IngressController's load balancer is in a 

>    malfunctioning state (i.e., the service is not getting reconciled) while the service is already provisioned.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   malfunctioning state (i.e., the service is not getting reconciled) while the service is being provisioned.
```

   The existing Ingress Operator logic will clearly indicate to the cluster admin that the load balancer failed to
   provision via the LoadBalancerReady status condition. In addition, the LoadBalancerReady condition will include the CCM 
   event logs that indicate to the cluster admin that the `eipAllocations` value is invalid (see Support Procedures for examples).
   Therefore, requiring manual service deletion provides a way for the Ingress Operator to produce a clear signal to the
   cluster admin that `eipAllocations` is invalid.

   See [Invalid EIPAllocation Annotation Values](#invalid-eipallocation-values) for examples of invalid `eipAllocation` annotation values.

   Reason #2: To mitigate upgrade compatibility issues.
   Note: Directly configuring the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` on the LoadBalancer-type service is not
   supported and never has been. However, this enhancement is designed to prevent cluster disruption upon upgrading with this
   unsupported configuration.

   If the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` annotation was previously configured and the cluster is upgraded,

>    the default value [] for EIPAllocations will clear the annotation for existing IngressControllers, which would break cluster ingress.

Reviewer 3: Is this what you mean here?
```suggestion
   the empty default value for EIPAllocations will clear the annotation for existing IngressControllers, which would break cluster ingress.
```

   However, requiring the service to be deleted to effectuate a `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.networkLoadBalancer.eipAllocations`
   value different from the current value of the annotation prevents this automatic removal of the service annotation on upgrade.

   Note: Cluster admins upgrading with an unmanaged EIP annotation don't need to delete the service to propagate the `eipAllocation` values, 
   instead they can follow the [Unmanaged EIPAllocation Annotation Migration Workflow](#unmanaged-eipallocation-annotation-migration-workflow).

>    Reason #3: The CCM Doesn't Reconcile NLB `eipAllocation` Updates after creation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   Reason #3: The CCM doesn't reconcile NLB `eipAllocation` updates after creation.
```

   The CCM doesn't reconcile `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` annotation updates to NLBs 
   once it has been created. However, requiring a service deletion will effectuate these changes.

   See [CCM Doesn't Reconcile NLB EIPAllocation Updates](#ccm-doesnt-reconcile-nlb-eipallocation-updates) for more details on why the CCM doesn't reconcile these updates.

>  

Reviewer 3: Isn't there a fourth reason? e.g. to allow the cluster admin to schedule service interruptions during a maintenance window.

   #####  Effectuating EIP Updates using automatic method:

>    If the admin wants to detect the change in `eipAllocations` and update the LB service automatically,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   If the cluster admin doesn't need to manage the service interruption, they can configure the LB service to be deleted automatically,
```

>    rather than explicitly deleting the Service after changes, they can add the  `ingress.operator.openshift.io/auto-delete-load-balancer` annotation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   rather than explicitly deleting the Service after changes, by adding the  `ingress.operator.openshift.io/auto-delete-load-balancer` annotation.
```

   While simpler in design, this approach could result in several minutes of unexpected disruption to ingress traffic. A cluster admin might not anticipate that updating
   the Subnets field could cause disruption, leading to an unwelcome surprise.
   
### 3. Any change to the service annotation does not trigger the operator to manage the load balancer service.
  The `status.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.networkLoadBalancer.eipAllocations`
  will eventually reflect the configured `eipAllocation` value by mirroring the value of
  `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` on the service. There are
  two scenarios in which the `EIPAllocations` status won't be equal to the `EIPAllocations` spec:

  1. The cluster admin manually configured the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`
   annotation on the service, which is not supported and likely to cause issues.
  2. The cluster admin configured the IngressController's `EIPAllocations` spec, but hasn't

>    effectuated the change by deleting the service (see [section](#cluster-administrator-updates-eipallocations-field-of-the-existing-ingress-controller)).

Reviewer 3: Broken link.

  status will always reflect the value present in the service annotation and not the values present in the IngressController Spec.

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Invalid EIPAllocation Values:
- Providing a right number of EIPs same as the number of public subnets as per AWS guidelines is an admin
responsibility. Details of the error message can be found [here](#error-messages-when-the-number-of-eip-provided-and-the-number-of-subnets-of-vpc-id-dont-match-are-mentioned-as-follows).
- Also providing existing available EIPs which are not assigned to any instance is important. Details of the error message can be found [here](#error-messages-for-invalid-eips-or-eips-not-present-in-the-subnet-of-the-vpc-are-mentioned-as-follows).
- If the above two points are not followed, the Kubernetes LoadBalancer service for the IngressController
  won't get assigned EIPs,  which will cause the LoadBalancer service to be in persistently pending state by the
  Cloud Controller Manager (CCM). The reason for the persistently pending state is posted to the status of the IngressController.

>   As of now we are not able to identify any more risks which can affect other components of the EP.

Reviewer 3: Remove.  Or add after the last risk statement.
```suggestion
```

#### CCM Doesn't Reconcile NLB eipAllocation Updates
Once a NLB is created by the CCM, any updates to the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` annotation will be validated,
but will not be propagated to the NLB.
Requiring services to be recreated upon updating the `...aws.networkLoadBalancer.eipAllocations` field as outlined in [Effectuating EIPAllocation Updates](#effectuating-eip-updates-using-manual-method) will mitigate cluster admins from experiencing this issue.

###  Effectuating EIP Updates using automatic method

> Please refer [subsection](#effectuating-eip-updates-using-automatic-method) for more details.

Reviewer 3: I think this is redundant unless you explain the risk explicitly.

### Drawbacks

Requiring the cluster admin to delete the LoadBalancer-type
service leads to several minutes of ingress traffic disruption.
This enhancement brings additional engineering complexity for upgrade
scenarios because cluster admins have previously been allowed to directly
add this annotation on a service.
Debugging invalid EIP Allocations will be confusing for cluster admins and may
lead to extra support cases or bugs.
This design requires a cluster admin to check the IngressController's status after
updating `eipAllocations` for instructions on how to proceed.

## Open Questions

> 1. Shall we support updating EIP in the default Classic `IngressController` after installation ?
>    Please refer to [section](#updating-eip-in-the-default-classic-ingresscontroller-after-installation).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Shall we support updating EIP in the default Classic `IngressController` after installation ?
   Yes.  Please refer to [section](#updating-eip-in-the-default-classic-ingresscontroller-after-installation).
```

2. What happens when a cluster-admin adds invalid EIPs ?

   The load balancer creation would not proceed and fail as per details mentioned in [subsection of Support Procedure](#error-messages-for-invalid-eips-or-eips-not-present-in-the-subnet-of-the-vpc-are-mentioned-as-follows)

3. What happens when a cluster-admin adds number of EIPs which are not equal to the number of public subnets for the VPC id tagged with cluster name.

   The load balancer creation would not proceed and fail as per details mentioned in [subsection of Support Procedure](#error-messages-when-the-number-of-eip-provided-and-the-number-of-subnets-of-vpc-id-dont-match-are-mentioned-as-follows)

4. What happens when a cluster-admin adds nothing under eipAllocations ?
  

>    The load balancer would be created with no eipAllocations and the service annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` will be removed.
>    For more check [this](#cluster-admin-wants-operator-to-automatically-effectuate-the-load-balancer-service-for-updated-ingress-controller-eipallocations-)
>    AWS will randomly assign the NLB's IP addresses from the IP address pools available.

Reviewer 3: Rearrange the sentences:
```suggestion
   The load balancer would be created with no eipAllocations and the service annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` will be removed.   AWS will randomly assign the NLB's IP addresses from the IP address pools available.
   For more details,  see [this](#cluster-admin-wants-operator-to-automatically-effectuate-the-load-balancer-service-for-updated-ingress-controller-eipallocations-)
 
```

5. Can you assign `eipAllocations` to an `IngressController` with scope `Internal` ?

    No, eipAllocations can be provided only for an `IngressController` with scope `External`.

>     The default IC is set to [External](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/blob/master/pkg/operator/operator.go#L476)

Reviewer 3: This link isn't correct, it doesn't point to scope.

>     However, we will validate the `IngressController` CR at API using CEL to check if `eipAllocations` are provided only when `scope` is 
>     set to `External`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `IngressController` CR cannot be saved if `eipAllocations` are provided and `scope` is not 
    set to `External`.
```

need to recreate the IngressController. This is different from our current design,
as described in [Effectuating EIPAllocation Updates](#effectuating-eip-updates-using-manual-method),
which is more subtle. With the current design, a cluster admin would need to check the
IngressController's status after updating `eipAllocations` for instructions on how to proceed.

However, we didn't use the immutability design because of the following drawbacks:

1. **Not Just a Load Balancer**: The IngressController, which encompasses DNS, HaProxy routers, and more, extends
   beyond just a load balancer. Updating the eipAllocations on the Ingress Controller only needs to propagate to the
   LB-type service, not the other components. Deleting the entire IngressController just to change `eipAllocations` is excessive,
   considering that only the service itself requires deletion.
2. **Prior Art**: We have an established a precedent in the [Ingress Mutable Publishing Scope](/enhancements/ingress/mutable-publishing-scope.md)
   design, where cluster admins are allowed to mutate an IngressController API field, but must delete the Service to
   effectuate the changes.

> 3. **Future Possibilities**: Should the AWS CCM eventually supports reliably modifying subnets without deleting the
>    LB-type service, we can then easily adapt the Ingress Operator to immediately effectuate the `eipAllocations` and eliminate
>    the need for a cluster admin to delete the LB-type service.

Reviewer 3: This is not a drawback, and isn't related to immutability.   It is really its own Alternative.
```suggestion
### Future Possibility based on changes to AWS CCM.

Should the AWS CCM eventually supports reliably modifying subnets without deleting the
   LB-type service, we can then easily adapt the Ingress Operator to immediately effectuate the `eipAllocations` and eliminate the need for a cluster admin to delete the LB-type service.
```

internet addresses are a scarce public resource. For more details please check [Elastic IP address quota](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/elastic-ip-addresses-eip.html#using-instance-addressing-limit).
When this cap is hit you will get the following error: `Elastic IP address could not be allocated.
The maximum number of addresses has been reached.`
Elastic IP Allocation can only be done for internet-facing NLB.

**cluster administrator** is a human user responsible for deploying a
cluster. A cluster administrator also has the rights to modify the cluster level components.

#### Set EIP using an installer:
1. Cluster administrator creates `install-config.yaml` and adds their domain, AWS region, and EIP allocation ids.
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
baseDomain: example.com
metadata:
  name: test-cluster
platform:
  aws:
    region: <AWS region>
    lbType: NLB
    networkLoadBalancer:
      eipAllocations:
      - eipalloc-1111
      - eipalloc-2222
      - eipalloc-3333
      - eipalloc-4444
      - eipalloc-5555 
...
```  
Here, the administrator needs to know how many public subnets the `AWS VPC ID` which is tagged by `cluster name` after installation.

> To check VPC ID:
> Go to `Your VPCs` under `Virtual Public CLoud` section, then search for the VPC ID tagged with `cluster name` using the 
> command `oc get infrastructure cluster -o jsonpath='{.status.infrastructureName}'`
> To check the public subnets for the `VPC ID` tagged with the cluster name we got from the above command:
> Go the `AWS Cloud Console` click the `Load Balancers` tab then under the `details` click `VPC ID` under VPC, then click the link under `Main route table` and then check the column `Explicit subnet associations` which
> will show you the number of public subnets available for that VPC ID.

Reviewer 5: I think this could benefit from some organization updates, and I am struggling to repeat this procedure.

I just tried it out, and I didn't have a "Load Balancers" tab, but I wasn't sure why you needed that? You found the VPC, just click the VPC ID link, and you at the "Main Route Table". I don't think you need anything about a load balancer, that seemed like an extra step that can just be removed:

```suggestion
To locate the public subnets:
1. Navigate to your AWS Web Console for the account that contains the cluster
2. Go to `Your VPCs` under the `Virtual Public Cloud` section
3. Search for the VPC ID tagged with `cluster name` using the command `oc get infrastructure cluster -o jsonpath='{.status.infrastructureName}'`
4. Click the VPC ID link for the VPC
5. Click the link under `Main route table` and then check the column `Explicit subnet associations` which
will show you the number of public subnets available for that VPC ID.
```

Author: ok done

One can try these scripts present [here](https://github.com/frobware/haproxy-hacks/tree/master/NE-1398) as well.

2. The installer will create the cluster ingress config object as follows:
```yaml
 oc edit ingress.config/cluster -o yaml
 ...
 apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
 kind: Ingress
 metadata:
...
   name: cluster
...
 spec:
   domain: apps.eip.devcluster.openshift.com
   loadBalancer:
     platform:
       aws:
         type: NLB
         networkLoadBalancer:
           eipAllocations:
           - eipalloc-1111
           - eipalloc-2222
           - eipalloc-3333
           - eipalloc-4444
           - eipalloc-5555
       type: AWS
```
3. Ingress Operator will create the default ingress controller with the service type load balancer having the service annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` having values of the field `eipAllocations` 
   from the Ingress Controller CR.

> #### Create an Ingress Controller using Ingress Controller CR and assign the EIP allocation mentioned in the CR to the kubernetes Load Balancer service for the Ingress Controller.

Reviewer 5: *nit* consistency.

```suggestion
#### Create an Ingress Controller using Ingress Controller CR and assign the EIP allocation mentioned in the CR to the kubernetes Load Balancer service for the Ingress Controller:
```

3. After upgrading, the IngressController will emit a `LoadBalancerProgressing` condition
   with `Status: True` because the spec's `EIPAllocations` (an empty slice `[]`) does not equal
   the current annotation.
4. In this case, the cluster admin must directly update
   `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.networkLoadBalancerParameters.eipAllocations` to the
   current value of the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` service.
5. The Ingress Operator will resolve the `LoadBalancerProgressing` condition back to
   `Status: False` as long as `EIPAllocations` is equivalent to `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`.

### Topology Considerations

#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes

Currently, there is no unique consideration for making this change work with Hypershift.

#### Standalone Clusters

This proposal does not have any special implications for standalone clusters.

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift

This proposal does not have any special implications for single-node
deployments or MicroShift.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

> #### 1. Set EIP through installer for the default ingress controller:
> a. The admin sets the `eipAllocations` in the installer using the install-config.yaml.
> 
> b. The installer then sets the ingress cluster object with the `eipAllocations`. 
> 
> c. The cluster ingress operator then creates a default ingress controller by:
>      
>      i. creating an default ingress controller CR.
> 
>      ii. then scaling a deployment for the Ingress Controller CR which has the value of the `eipAllocations` from the 
>      ingress cluster object.
> 
>      iii. then creating a service of service type load balancer with the annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`, 
>      which uses the value from the field `eipAllocations` of ingress controller CR.
> 

Reviewer 5: TIL When you indent a line a with 4-5 spaces, Github renders it as a panel. For example:

    I'm indented 4 lines!

It's quite confusing to read. If you change the headers from a h4 `####`, make it a number and just bold it, Github will render this exactly the way you want, `1.a.i`.

```suggestion
**1. Set EIP through installer for the default ingress controller:**
   1. The admin sets the `eipAllocations` in the installer using the install-config.yaml.
   2. The installer then sets the ingress cluster object with the `eipAllocations`. 
   3. The cluster ingress operator then creates a default ingress controller by
      1. creating an default ingress controller CR.
      2. then scaling a deployment for the Ingress Controller CR which has the value of the `eipAllocations` from the 
          ingress cluster object.
      3. then creating a service of service type load balancer with the annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`,
         which uses the value from the field `eipAllocations` of ingress controller CR.
[so on...]
```

Here's the preview:

**1. Set EIP through installer for the default ingress controller:**
   1. The admin sets the `eipAllocations` in the installer using the install-config.yaml.
   2. The installer then sets the ingress cluster object with the `eipAllocations`. 
   3. The cluster ingress operator then creates a default ingress controller by
      1. creating an default ingress controller CR.
      2. then scaling a deployment for the Ingress Controller CR which has the value of the `eipAllocations` from the 
          ingress cluster object.
      3. then creating a service of service type load balancer with the annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`,
         which uses the value from the field `eipAllocations` of ingress controller CR.

Author: ok done

Reviewer 5: sorry I got the suggestion wrong, if you look at my preview above, it works now.

Author: thanks

  The load balancer creation would not proceed and fail as per details mentioned in [subsection of Test Plan](#Test when Ingress Controller CR has been provided with invalid EIPAllocations.)

6. What happens when a cluster-admin adds number of EIPs which are not equal to the number of public subnets for the VPC id tagged with cluster name.

  The load balancer creation would not proceed and fail as per details mentioned in [subsection of Test Plan](#test-when-ingress-controller-cr-has-been-provided-with-number-of-eips-not-equal-to-the-number-of-public-subnets-for-vpc-tagged-with-your-cluster-name)

7. What happens when a cluster-admin adds nothing under eipAllocations ?
  
  The load balancer would be created with no eipAllocations and the service annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` will be removed.
  For more check [this](#Cluster admin wants operator to update the Load Balancer service for updated Ingress Controller eipAllocations)
  The NLB will get the regular IP address assigned in that case.

## Test Plan

### This EP will be covered by unit tests in the following:
- cluster-ingress-operator
- installer

> ### This  EP will also be covered by end to end tests.

Reviewer 5: *nit* consistency

```suggestion
### This  EP will also be covered by end to end tests:
```

Author: done

      request id: 58136c42-e1bd-4c1a-ac38-7078da2b1d95"
      The kube-controller-manager logs may contain more details.
    reason: SyncLoadBalancerFailed
    status: "False"
    type: LoadBalancerReady
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-17T02:54:25Z"
    message: LoadBalancer is not progressing
    reason: LoadBalancerNotProgressing
    status: "False"
    type: LoadBalancerProgressing
...
...
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-17T03:09:32Z"
    message: |-
      One or more status conditions indicate unavailable: LoadBalancerReady=False 
      (SyncLoadBalancerFailed: The service-controller component is reporting 
      SyncLoadBalancerFailed events like: Error syncing load balancer: failed to ensure
      load balancer: error creating load balancer: "ResourceInUse: The allocation IDs 
      are not available for use\n\tstatus code: 400, request id: 58136c42-e1bd-4c1a-ac38-7078da2b1d95"
      The kube-controller-manager logs may contain more details.)
    reason: IngressControllerUnavailable
    status: "False"
    type: Available

```

3. Are there any pre-requisites for this EP ?
  Yes, please refer section `Pre-requisites` under [Workflow Description](#Workflow Description)

> 4. What happens when the cluster-admin specified invalid EIPs in install-config.yaml at installation time (day 0) ?

Author: Invalid EIP is generally when the EIP does not exist in the AWS environment or is not available For Example: is assigned to some instance.

> 4. What happens when the cluster-admin specified invalid EIPs in install-config.yaml at installation time (day 0) ?

Reviewer 8: Right. Those sound like standard validations and should be trivial to implement. As you described them, the validations don’t even need to be done in relation to the subnets. This should be straightforward to implement in the installer.

  We would try to get the installer feasibly validate the install config for day 0. However, we still need verify this
  with the installer team. Mostly, we will need to add validations in [pkg/types/aws/validation/platform.go](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/master/pkg/types/aws/validation/platform.go)
  Things to check with the installer team:
  - How to find the number of public subnets for the VPC(which will be created by the installer)? Shall
  we check compare the eips with the number of Availability Zones ?

>   - When VPC is already created and we already know the VPC ID can we check the number of subnets using the

Author: But we can find the VPC_ID of the VPC using the cluster name `oc get infrastructure cluster -o jsonpath='{.status.infrastructureName}'` ? Right ?

>   - When VPC is already created and we already know the VPC ID can we check the number of subnets using the

Reviewer 8: I think some context is getting lost. The question in the enhancement is whether we can determine the number of subnets (at install time, right?). Users specify the cluster subnets—not the vpc id—directly in the install config. So we could just count the number in the install config.

>   - When VPC is already created and we already know the VPC ID can we check the number of subnets using the

Author: Sorry. I was thinking in a wrong direction. Thanks for correcting me!
So, basically for BYO Subnets, we check if the number of EIP allocations provided in the install-config match the number of BYO subnets provided in the install config yaml file. Does that sound right ? cc @gcs278

  same logic present in the [e2e tests](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/pull/1034/commits/fba43803e232277a96565b1eb8875d19df9bf66e#diff-160d46f77f47e8e0d35737b019c27a6e4a6f7e7eae4f6e85c0dcdb43b20a2379R163).
  Related comments:
  - [discussion on separate the validation for BYOB subnets and installer-created subnets](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1593#discussion_r1593385372)
  - [workflow for when the installer creates the VPC and public subnets](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1593#discussion_r1594164039)

  To summarize shall we proceed with the following ?(Installer team to confirm):
  - For validation for BYOB subnets:
  The logic as per [e2e tests](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/pull/1034/commits/fba43803e232277a96565b1eb8875d19df9bf66e#diff-160d46f77f47e8e0d35737b019c27a6e4a6f7e7eae4f6e85c0dcdb43b20a2379R163) will work 

>   if added to [pkg/types/aws/validation/platform.go](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/master/pkg/types/aws/validation/platform.go). Is the installer team OK with that ?

Author: I dont think we need to check the PR link I mentioned now as per pour discussion in https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1593/files#r1623669103

Thanks for pointing to the right link for the validation.

  - For validation for  Installer Created Subnets:

>   number of EIPs must match number of AZs in region (installer team please confirm this).  

Reviewer 8: Yes this seems reasonable. Users can specify a subset of AZs in the installconfig, but it should still be relatively straightforward.

Author: OK thanks for confirming!

    // network load balancer. Present only if type is NLB.
    //
    // +optional
    NetworkLoadBalancerParameters *AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters `json:"nlbParameters,omitempty"`
}

// AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters holds configuration parameters for an
// AWS Network load balancer. For Example: Setting AWS EIPs https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/elastic-ip-addresses-eip.html
type AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters struct {
    // You can assign Elastic IP addresses to the Network Load Balancer by adding the following annotation.
    // The number of Allocation IDs must match the number of subnets that are used for the load balancer.
    // service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations: eipalloc-xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx,eipalloc-yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy
    // https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/elastic-ip-addresses-eip.html
    // https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.7/guide/service/annotations/#eip-allocations
    // +openshift:enable:FeatureGate=SetEIPForNLBIngressController 
    // The EIPs in the cluster config are only used when the operator creates the default IngressController. 

>     // It isn't used as a default value when eipAllocations is not specified on the IngressController.

Reviewer 5: I think this is a important difference that concerns me about the Ingress object's API consistency regarding `default` IngressController vs. default value for new IngressControllers.

Reviewing the current fields:

- `spec.loadBalancer.platform.aws.type`:
  - Sets the LBType for the `default` IngressController AND the default value for new IngressControllers (note: the [docs](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/9fb7ffb45a2d501f28d850e394fc597c3a5dca29/config/v1/types_ingress.go#L137-L139) are a bit misleading, as it doesn't point out the fact that it also sets the default value.
- `spec.loadBalancer.platform.aws.nlbParameters.eipAllocations`: [this EP's API]
  - Sets the eipAllocations for `default` IngressController *only*.
- `spec.loadBalancer.platform.aws.subnets`: [my draft [EP](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1634)]
  - Sets the subnets for the `default` IngressController AND the default value for new IngressControllers.

Now `eipAllocations` use case *only* set the `default` IngressController makes sense. Setting the default value for new IngressControllers would be a bit silly, since you can't share EIPs. But this field is inconsistent with the other fields surrounding it. That seems potentially confusing. 

My question: Should we try to have the API properly reflect what it's actually configuring? i.e. `default` vs. default value? Maybe it's too late fix it properly and comments are sufficient.

@Miciah since we've talked a little about this before, do you have an opinion?

Author: @gcs278 that is why i have mentioned about this here https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1593/files#diff-cfc19a244868c1f04e3b6abf6779c80f4938e934d4fb8913a4b72ada48b266aeR125

Reviewer 5: Right, I see that. My question is more of: is it possible the API structure/naming could somehow reflect what it's trying to configure? e.g. `spec.loadBalancer.platform.aws.nlbParameters.defaultIngressControllerEIPAllocations`

But on second though, that's pretty ugly, and I don't know if that makes sense. I don't have a good answer. I just thought it was worth pointing out the divergence of the API here. The API seems a bit inconsistent, but I suppose we don't have any better options other than just document it in the GO docs.

    // The number of Allocation IDs must match the number of subnets that are used for the load balancer.
    // service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations: eipalloc-xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx,eipalloc-yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy
    // https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/elastic-ip-addresses-eip.html
    // https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.7/guide/service/annotations/#eip-allocations
    // +openshift:enable:FeatureGate=SetEIPForNLBIngressController
    // The EIPs in the cluster config are only used when the operator creates the default IngressController.
    // It isn't used as a default value when eipAllocations is not specified on the IngressController.
    EIPAllocations []configv1.EIPAllocations `json:"eipAllocations"`
}

```

### Workflow Description

Pre-requisites: One must allocate an Elastic IP address from [Amazon's pool of public IPv4 addresses](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/elastic-ip-addresses-eip.html#using-instance-addressing-eips-allocating),
or from a custom IP address pool that you have brought to your AWS account. For more information about bringing your own IP address range to your 

> AWS account, see [Bring your own IP addresses (BYOIP) in Amazon EC2](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/ec2-byoip.html).

Reviewer 5: *nit* is this period supposed to be there?

```suggestion
AWS account, see [Bring your own IP addresses (BYOIP) in Amazon EC2](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/ec2-byoip.html)
```

Author: no

```sh
% oc get svc router-test -n openshift-ingress 
NAME          TYPE           CLUSTER-IP       EXTERNAL-IP                                                                     PORT(S)                      AGE
router-test   LoadBalancer   172.30.230.109   a95d070adbbf045c9b356ed9db8d3cda-89fbf4dfc638408e.elb.us-east-1.amazonaws.com   80:30453/TCP,443:32704/TCP   77s
```

If you remove all EIPs, the annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` is removed from the service as well.

#### Unmanaged Subnet Annotation Migration Workflow

Migrating an unmanaged `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`
service annotation to `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.networkLoadBalancerParameters.eipAllocations`
after upgrading to 4.y doesn't require a cluster admin to delete the LoadBalancer-type
service:

1. Cluster admin confirms that initially `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`
   is set on the LoadBalancer-type service managed by the IngressController.
2. The cluster admin upgrades OpenShift to v4.y and the service annotation is not

>    changed or removed. For more details see [section](#Any change to the service annotation does not trigger the operator to manage the load balancer service).  

Reviewer 5: `[section]` This doesn't render as a link. It may be because you have the wrong link (I think you are missing a `4. `

Author: yes updated.

3. After upgrading, the IngressController will emit a `LoadBalancerProgressing` condition
   with `Status: True` because the spec's `EIPAllocations` (an empty slice `[]`) does not equal
   the current annotation.
4. In this case, the cluster admin must directly update
   `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.networkLoadBalancerParameters.eipAllocations` to the
   current value of the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` service.
5. The Ingress Operator will resolve the `LoadBalancerProgressing` condition back to
   `Status: False` as long as `EIPAllocations` is equivalent to `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`.

> 

Reviewer 5: [Reposting](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1593#discussion_r1631514651) for visibility here:

For installer-created-VPCs, how does a cluster admin accurately predict how many EIPAllocations to bring so their cluster doesn't fail to install? Maybe they don't know what public subnets will be created by the openshift-installer. 

I think it would be good to have a workflow for this. To illustrate further, the workflow could start like:

1. Cluster admin wants to use EIPs, but isn't bringing their own VPC, so they need to know exactly how many EIPs to create.
2. Cluster admin should review https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/global-infrastructure/regions_az/ to find out how many AZs are in the region they are installing into.
3. Cluster admin should use the same number of EIPs as AZs in their region.

Let me know if that makes sense, or if anyone has a reason why this might be redundant. Cluster admins probably know how many AZs they are installing into, but I suppose a workflow like this would provide a concrete example of how this would happen if they don't.

Author: This workflow is very good. Thanks!

Reviewer 3: @miheer did this get added?

1. #### Set EIP through installer for the default ingress controller:
   1. The admin sets the `eipAllocations` in the installer using the install-config.yaml.
   2. The installer then sets the ingress cluster object with the `eipAllocations`. 
   3. The cluster ingress operator then creates a default ingress controller by:
      1. creating an default ingress controller CR.
      2. then scaling a deployment for the Ingress Controller CR which has the value of the `eipAllocations` from the 
     ingress cluster object.
      3. then creating a service of service type load balancer with the annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`, 
     which uses the value from the field `eipAllocations` of ingress controller CR.

#### 2. Create a new ingress controller with EIPs:
   
   The admin sets the `eipAllocations` in the Ingress Controller CR. Then same process
   as per point 1.iii.b and 1.iii.c is followed by the ingress operator. 

#### 3. Add, delete, or change the EIP for an existing IngressController:
   
   When the admin changes the eipAllocations field in the Ingress Controller CR, the ingress operator sets the Load Balancer

>    Progressing status as per [section](#Cluster administrator updates eipAllocations field of the existing ingress controller)

Reviewer 5: `[section]` isn't rendered as a link. I'm not sure if you can have spaces in markdown links. Try converting spaces to `-`.

Author: done

   The cluster admin has to manually delete service in order to effectuate the change.
   Then step 1.iii.c is followed by the ingress operator.

   If the admin wants to detect the change in `eipAllocations` and update the LB service automatically,

>    rather than explicitly deleting the Service after changes, they can add the  `ingress.operator.openshift.io/auto-delete-load-balancer annotation`.

Reviewer 5: *nit* I don't think you meant to put the word "annotation" in a code block:

```suggestion
   rather than explicitly deleting the Service after changes, they can add the  `ingress.operator.openshift.io/auto-delete-load-balancer` annotation.
```

Author: done

   
### 4. Any change to the service annotation does not trigger the operator to manage the load balancer service.
  The `status.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.providerParameters.aws.networkLoadBalancer.eipAllocations`
  will eventually reflect the configured subnet value by mirroring the value of
  `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` on the service. There are

>   two scenarios in which the `Subnets` status won't be equal to the `Subnets` spec:

Reviewer 5: I got confused for a second here thinking I was review my EP. I think you forgot to change all of the references from `Subnets` to `eipAllocations` :smiley:

Author: sorry

Author: done

  1. The cluster admin manually configured the `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-subnets`
   annotation on the service, which is not supported and likely to cause issues.
  2. The cluster admin configured the IngressController's `Subnets` spec, but hasn't

>    effectuated the change by deleting the service (see [section](#Cluster administrator updates eipAllocations field of the existing ingress controller)).

Reviewer 5: `[section]` doesn't render, same problem as above I think.

Author: done

  This proposal's use of `status.endpointPublishingStrategy` is consistent with the approach in
  [LoadBalancer Allowed Source Ranges](/enhancements/ingress/lb-allowed-source-ranges.md),
  but diverges with the approach in [Ingress Mutable Publishing Scope](/enhancements/ingress/mutable-publishing-scope.md).
  The Ingress Mutable Publishing Scope design sets `status.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.scope`
  equal to `spec.endpointPublishingStrategy.loadBalancer.scope`, which may not always reflect the actual scope of the
  load balancer. This proposal for `EIPs` ensures `status.endpointPublishingStrategy` reflects the _actual_ value
  (in our case, the value of `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` on the Service).

>   In short, the operator won't manage an annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` [here](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/blob/master/pkg/operator/controller/ingress/load_balancer_service.go#L214-#L225)

Reviewer 5: *nit* should use permalink and add a period.
```suggestion
  In short, the operator won't manage an annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` [here](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/blob/ddd1ee6dfb7e7c37d9525f48242baab55c7527fc/pkg/operator/controller/ingress/load_balancer_service.go#L214-#L225).
```

  Any change to the service annotation won't trigger the operator to check it's spec and then update the service annotation.

### Risks and Mitigations

- Providing a right number of EIPs same as the number of public subnets as per AWS guidelines is an admin
responsibility.
- Also providing existing available EIPs which are not assigned to any instance is important.
- If the above two points are not followed, the Kubernetes LoadBalancer service for the IngressController
  won't get assigned EIPs,  which will cause the LoadBalancer service to be in persistently pending state by the
  Cloud Controller Manager (CCM). The reason for the persistently pending state is posted to the status of the IngressController.

>   As of now we are not able to identify any more risks which can affect other components of the EP.

Reviewer 5: What about assigning EIPs to an internal ingress controller? Is that a risk? Will that fail a cluster? If so, should we add validation to ensure EIPAllocations are only used with External-type load balancers?

Author: yes. we need can assign eips only for internet facing nlb.

Author: I just answered here  https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1593/files#r1641646780

Author: I don't see any field available to set for scope in the installer-config.yaml. Also the default IC is set to [External](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/blob/master/pkg)

However, we will need to check validate ingress controller CR at APP level when user provides eipAllocations and scope in the ingress controller CR.

      "ResourceInUse: The allocation IDs are not available for use\n\tstatus code: 400, 
      request id: 58136c42-e1bd-4c1a-ac38-7078da2b1d95"
      The kube-controller-manager logs may contain more details.
    reason: SyncLoadBalancerFailed
    status: "False"
    type: LoadBalancerReady
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-17T02:54:25Z"
    message: LoadBalancer is not progressing
    reason: LoadBalancerNotProgressing
    status: "False"
    type: LoadBalancerProgressing
...
...
  - lastTransitionTime: "2024-04-17T03:09:32Z"
    message: |-
      One or more status conditions indicate unavailable: LoadBalancerReady=False 
      (SyncLoadBalancerFailed: The service-controller component is reporting 
      SyncLoadBalancerFailed events like: Error syncing load balancer: failed to ensure
      load balancer: error creating load balancer: "ResourceInUse: The allocation IDs 
      are not available for use\n\tstatus code: 400, request id: 58136c42-e1bd-4c1a-ac38-7078da2b1d95"
      The kube-controller-manager logs may contain more details.)
    reason: IngressControllerUnavailable
    status: "False"
    type: Available

```

3. Are there any pre-requisites for this EP ?

>   Yes, please refer section `Pre-requisites` under [Workflow Description](#Workflow Description)

Reviewer 5: `[Workflow Description]` is an invalid link. I think you need to replace ` ` with `-`.

```suggestion
  Yes, please refer section `Pre-requisites` under [Workflow Description](#workflow-description)
```

Author: done

4. What happens when the cluster-admin specified invalid EIPs in install-config.yaml at installation time (day 0) ?

   We would try to get the installer feasibly validate the `install-config.yaml` for day 0.
   - For validation for BYOB subnets:
  We will count if the number of cluster subnets provided by the user in the `install-config.yaml` were equal to 
  the number of the eip allocations provided in the install-config.yaml. We will need to add validations 
  in [pkg/asset/installconfig/aws/validation.go](https://github.com/openshift/installer/blob/master/pkg/asset/installconfig/aws/validation.go#L186)

>   Discussion with the installer team to confirm this [approach](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1593/files#r1617963511).

Author: I will remove these section.

  - For validation for  Installer Created Subnets:

>   The number of EIPs must match number of AZs in region. Installer team has confirmed with this [approach](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1593/files#r1612258317).

Reviewer 5: This link doesn't work anymore.

Author: I will remove this sentence.

  - [workflow for when the installer creates the VPC and public subnets](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1593#discussion_r1594164039)

5. What happens when a cluster-admin adds invalid EIPs ?

  The load balancer creation would not proceed and fail as per details mentioned in [subsection of Test Plan](#Test when Ingress Controller CR has been provided with invalid EIPAllocations.)

6. What happens when a cluster-admin adds number of EIPs which are not equal to the number of public subnets for the VPC id tagged with cluster name.

  The load balancer creation would not proceed and fail as per details mentioned in [subsection of Test Plan](#test-when-ingress-controller-cr-has-been-provided-with-number-of-eips-not-equal-to-the-number-of-public-subnets-for-vpc-tagged-with-your-cluster-name)

7. What happens when a cluster-admin adds nothing under eipAllocations ?
  
  The load balancer would be created with no eipAllocations and the service annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations` will be removed.

>   For more check [this](#Cluster admin wants operator to update the Load Balancer service for updated Ingress Controller eipAllocations)

Reviewer 5: Link doesn't work.

Author: done

>   The NLB will get the regular IP address assigned in that case.

Reviewer 5: *nit* `regular` a bit of ambiguous term here, and also don't NLB almost always get multiple IPs assigned? Did you mean:

```suggestion
  AWS will randomly assign the NLB's IP addresses from the IP address pools available.
```

> 8. Why should a custom IngressController should avoid using the EIPs from the cluster config ?

Reviewer 5: *nit* awkward wording.

```suggestion
8. Why should a custom IngressController avoid using the EIPs from the cluster config ?
```

  A custom IngressController cannot use the same EIPs that the default IngressController is using.
  Usually, the default IngressController is using the EIPs from the cluster config.
  Therefore, a custom IngressController should not try to use the EIPs from the cluster config
  because that will fail in the usual case (because the default IngressController is already using them).
  

>   The default IngressController cannot use the EIPs from the cluster config if a custom

Reviewer 5: Déjà vu. This is a repeated paragraph.

   the polling loop of the operator does, and the cluster-admin doesn't specify eipAllocations?

  No. The eips in the cluster config are only used when the operator creates the default IngressController.
  If the default Ingress Controller is not found and if the polling loop kicks in and detects it's absence it will
  create a default IC with the eips mentioned in the cluster config object of ingress.
  However, it isn't used as a default value when eipAllocations is not specified on the IngressController because
  the cluster-admin may delete the default IngressController and then recreate it with no eips or no already assigned eips
  or before the polling loop does.
  Because the operator only uses the cluster config to specify eipAllocations when the operator itself creates
  the default IngressController, the cluster-admin can always delete and recreate the default IngressController
  with eipAllocations deliberately left unspecified, so that the IngressController doesn't use the EIPs from the
  cluster config. Or the cluster-admin  can always delete and recreate the default IngressController with eipAllocations

>   which are not already specified in the config ingress cluster object.

Reviewer 5: Can I update the ingress cluster object EIPAllocations and then delete the `default` IngressController to change the EIPs? I don't think that's mentioned in this EP.

I think you should add another workflow: `Changing the EIPs for the default IngressController` and document either:
1. Changing the ingress `cluster` objects EIPs and deleting the ingress controller
2. Deleting and quickly recreating the `default` IngressController with updated EIPs.

I would vote for #1, as that's a more permanent and less racy solution (i.e. if another cluster admin recreates the `default` IC, then the updated EIPs aren't erased).

Author: done

Downgrading will not change the value of the annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`.

## Version Skew Strategy

N/A

## Operational Aspects of API Extensions

- If Ingress Controller CR is provided with incorrect `eipAllocations` or if the number of `eipAllocations` does
  not match the number of public subnets for VPC ID tagged with cluster name then the Kubernetes LoadBalancer service
  will be in "Pending" as an LB won't be created in AWS. The reasons for the failure can be found in the status of the 
  Ingress Controller.

- In case of event of an issue because of this API the network edge team needs to be involved
  in.

## Support Procedures

CCM - Cloud  Controller Manager

- If the service is not getting updated with the EIP annotation and the kubernetes load balancer 
   service is in `Pending` state then check the `cloud-controller-manager` logs and ingresscontroller status.

In the CCM logs search for the `Ingress Controller` name and check if you find any error related EIP allocation failure.
```sh
  oc logs <ccm pod name> -n openshift-cloud-controller-manager
```

In the Ingress Controller status, check the status for the following:

> - Error messages for invalid eips or eips not present in the subnet of the VPC are mentioned [here](#Test when Ingress Controller CR has been provided with invalid EIPAllocations.)

Reviewer 5: bad link

Author: done

> - Error messages when the number of EIP provided and the number of subnets of VPC ID don't match are mentioned [here](#Test when Ingress Controller CR has been provided with number of EIPs not equal to the number of public subnets for VPC tagged with your cluster name.).

Reviewer 5: bad link

Author: done

// +union
type AWSLoadBalancerParameters struct {
    // networkLoadBalancerParameters holds configuration parameters for an AWS
    // network load balancer. Present only if type is NLB.
    //
    // +optional
    NetworkLoadBalancerParameters *AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters `json:"nlbParameters,omitempty"`	
}

// AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters holds configuration parameters for an
// AWS Network load balancer. For Example: Setting AWS EIPs https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/elastic-ip-addresses-eip.html
type AWSNetworkLoadBalancerParameters struct {
    // You can assign Elastic IP addresses to the Network Load Balancer by adding the following annotation. 
    // The number of Allocation IDs must match the number of subnets that are used for the load balancer.
    // service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations: eipalloc-xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx,eipalloc-yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy
    // https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/elastic-ip-addresses-eip.html

>     // https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/aws-load-balancer-controller/v2.7/guide/service/annotations/#eip-allocations

Reviewer 6: Same remark about the usage of the ALBC doc vs https://cloud-provider-aws.sigs.k8s.io/service_controller/.

#### Standalone Clusters

This proposal does not have any special implications for standalone clusters.

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift

This proposal does not have any special implications for single-node
deployments or MicroShift.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

#### 1. Set EIP through installer for the default ingress controller:
1. The admin sets the `eipAllocations` in the installer using the install-config.yaml.

2. The installer then sets the ingress cluster object with the `eipAllocations`. 

3. The cluster ingress operator then creates a default ingress controller by:
     
     1. creating an default ingress controller CR.

     2. then scaling a deployment for the Ingress Controller CR which has the value of the `eipAllocations` from the 
     ingress cluster object.

     3. then creating a service of service type load balancer with the annotation `service.beta.kubernetes.io/aws-load-balancer-eip-allocations`, 
     which uses the value from the field `eipAllocations` of ingress controller CR.

#### 2. Create a new ingress controller with EIPs:
   
   The admin sets the `eipAllocations` in the Ingress Controller CR. Then same process

>    as per point 1.c.ii and 1.c.iii is followed by the ingress operator. 

Reviewer 5: Based on your changes above, this needs to be:

```suggestion
   as per point 1.3.ii and 1.3.iii is followed by the ingress operator. 
```

Author: I think it should be "as per point 1.iii.b and 1.iii.c is followed by the ingress operator. "
